The Project Gutenberg eBook, Music Notation and Terminology, by Karl W. Gehrkens
================================================================================

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
    almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
    re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
    with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

Title: Music Notation and Terminology

Author: Karl W. Gehrkens

Release Date: October 8, 2006 [eBook \#19499]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ISO-8859-1

\*\*\*START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK MUSIC NOTATION AND
TERMINOLOGY\*\*\*

 

### E-text prepared by David Newman, Linda Cantoni,\
 and the Project Gutenberg Online Distributed Proofreading Team\
 ([http://www.pgdp.net/](http://www.pgdp.net/)).\
 Thanks to Alex Guzman for the realization of the figured bass in Figure 67,\
 and to Bunji Hisamori and the Classical Midi Connection\
 ([http://www.classicalmidiconnection.com](http://www.classicalmidiconnection.com))\
 for the MIDI sequence of the Beethoven Sonata Op. 31, No. 3.

 

*Transcriber's Note:* This e-text contains Unicode characters
representing music symbols (sharp, flat, and natural) that may not
display properly in your browser or font. A mouse-hover description of
these symbols has been provided, e.g.: A♭ G♯ C♮.

 

* * * * *

 

 

MUSIC NOTATION\
 AND TERMINOLOGY
================

By KARL W. GEHRKENS, A.M.
-------------------------

### ASSOCIATE PROFESSOR OF SCHOOL MUSIC\
 OBERLIN CONSERVATORY OF MUSIC\

![logo](images/logo.jpg "logo")

THE A. S. BARNES COMPANY\
 NEW YORK 1914\

Copyright, 1914, by\
 THE A. S. BARNES COMPANY\

* * * * *

[Pg iii]

PREFACE
-------

The study of *music notation and terminology* by classes in
conservatories and in music departments of colleges and normal schools
is a comparative innovation, one reason for the non-existence of such
courses in the past being the lack of a suitable text-book, in which
might be found in related groups clear and accurate definitions of the
really essential terms. But with the constantly increasing interest in
music study (both private and in the public schools), and with the
present persistent demand that music teaching shall become more
systematic and therefore more efficient in turning out a more
*intelligent* class of pupils, it has become increasingly necessary to
establish courses in which the prospective teacher of music (after
having had considerable experience with music itself) might acquire a
concise and accurate knowledge of a fairly large number of terms, most
of which he has probably already encountered as a student, and many of
which he knows the general meaning of, but none of which he perhaps
knows accurately enough to enable him to impart his knowledge clearly
and economically to others.

To meet the need of a text-book for this purpose in his own classes the
author has been for several years gathering material from all available
sources, and it is hoped that the arrangement of this material in
related groups as here presented will serve to give the student not only
some insight into the present meaning of a goodly number of terms, but
will also enable him to see more clearly *why* certain terms have the
meaning which at present attaches to them. To this latter end the [Pg
iv]derivations of many of the terms are given in connection with their
definition.

The aim has not been to present an exhaustive list, and the selection of
terms has of course been influenced largely by the author's own
individual experience, hence many teachers will probably feel that
important terms have been omitted that should have been included. For
this state of affairs no apology is offered except that it would
probably be impossible to write a book on this subject which would
satisfy everyone in either the selection or actual definition of terms.

In formulating the definitions themselves an attempt has been made to
use such words as *note*, *tone*, et cetera with at least a fair degree
of accuracy, and while the attitude of the author on this point may be
criticized as being puristic and pedantic, it is nevertheless his
opinion that the next generation of music students and teachers will be
profited by a more accurate use of certain terms that have been
inaccurately used for so long that the present generation has to a large
extent lost sight of the fact that the use is inaccurate. The author is
well aware of the fact that reform is a matter of growth rather than of
edict, but he is also of the belief that before reform can actually
begin to come, the *need* of reform must be felt by a fairly large
number of actively interested persons. It is precisely because so few
musicians realize the need of any change in music terminology that the
changes recommended by committees who have given the matter careful
thought are so slow in being adopted. It is hoped that some few points
at which reform in the terminology of music is necessary may be brought
to the attention of a few additional musicians thru this volume, and
that the cause may thus be helped in some slight degree.

It is suggested that in using the book for class-room purposes the
teacher emphasize not only the definition and derivation of all terms
[Pg v]studied, but the spelling and pronunciation as well. For this
latter purpose a pronouncing index has been appended.

It is impossible to give credit to all sources from which ideas have
been drawn, but especial mention should be made of the eminently clear
and beautifully worded definitions compiled by Professor Waldo S. Pratt
or the Century Dictionary, and the exceedingly valuable articles on an
almost all-inclusive range of topics found in the new edition of Grove's
Dictionary. Especial thanks for valuable suggestions as to the
arrangement of the material, etc., are also due to Dr. Raymond H.
Stetson, Professor of Psychology, Oberlin College; Arthur E. Heacox,
Professor of Theory, Oberlin Conservatory of Music; and Charles I. Rice,
Supervisor of Music, Worcester, Mass., as well as to various members of
the Music Teachers' National Association who have offered valuable
advice along certain specific lines.

K.W.G.

Oberlin Conservatory of Music, *June, 1913*

* * * * *

[Pg vii]

CONTENTS
--------

[Chapter I.](#CHAPTER_I)—Some Principles of Correct Notation
[1](#Page_1)\
 1. Note.\
 2, 3. Rules for turning stems.\
 4. Use of cross-stroke.\
 5. Rest.\
 6. G Clef.\
 7. F Clef and C Clef.\
 8. Sharp and double-sharp.\
 9. Flat, double-flat and natural.\
 10. Tie.\
 11. Dot after a note.\
 \
 [Chapter II.](#CHAPTER_II)—Symbols of Music Defined [5](#Page_5)\
 12. Staff and Great Staff.\
 13. Leger Lines.\
 14. Staff degrees.\
 15. Clef.\
 16. Treble and bass Clefs.\
 17. Movable C Clef.\
 18. Sharp.\
 19. Flat.\
 20. Double-sharp and double-flat.\
 \
 [Chapter III.](#CHAPTER_III)—Symbols of Music Defined (*continued*)
[8](#Page_8)\
 21. Natural\
 22, 23. Key-signature; how determine whether a major or minor key.\
 24, 25. Accidentals; with tie across bar.\
 26. Rules concerning altered staff degrees.\
 27. Enharmonic.\
 28. Notes; pitch and length of tones.\
 29. Rests.\
 30. Lists of notes and rests.\
 31. English names for.\
 32. Less common forms.\
 33. Whole rest, peculiar use of.\
 34. Bar.\
 35. Double-bar.\
 \
 [Chapter IV.](#CHAPTER_IV)—Abbreviations, Signs, etc. [13](#Page_13)\
 36-40. Signs for repetition.\
 41. Continuation.\
 42. Rest.\
 43. Pause.\
 44. Hold.\
 45-47. Alteration of Pitch.\
 48. Octave names.\
 \
 [Chapter V.](#CHAPTER_V)—Abbreviations, Signs, etc. (*continued*)
[17](#Page_17)\
 49-51. Dots after notes.\
 52. Dots over or under notes.\
 53. Dash over note.\
 54. Tie.\
 55. Slur.\
 56. Slur or tie with dots.\
 57. Dash over note.\
 58. Dash and dot over note.\
 59. Accent marks.\
 60. m.d., m.g., etc.\
 61. Arpeggio.\
 62. Messa di voce.\
 63. Violin bow signs.\
 \
 [Chapter VI.](#CHAPTER_VI)—Embellishments [22](#Page_22)\
 64. Definition and kinds.\
 65. Trill.\
 66-68. Mordent.\
 69-72. Turn.\
 73, 74. Appoggiatura.\
 75. Acciaccatura.\
 \
 [Chapter VII.](#CHAPTER_VII)—Scales [27](#Page_27)\
 76. Definition, and old forms.\
 77. Origin.\
 78. Key.\
 79. Three general classes.\
 80. Diatonic, defined.\
 81. Major diatonic.\
 82. Tetrachords.\
 83. The fifteen positions.\
 \
 [Chapter VIII.](#CHAPTER_VIII)—Scales (*continued*) [33](#Page_33)\
 84. Minor diatonic.\
 85. Original form.\
 86. Harmonic minor.\
 87. Melodic minor.\
 88. Eleven positions.\
 89. Relative minor.\
 90. Tonic minor.\
 91. Diatonic scale names.\
 92. Syllable-names.\
 93. Chromatic scale.\
 94. Nine positions.\
 [Pg viii]95. Whole-step scale.\
 \
 [Chapter IX.](#CHAPTER_IX)—Auxiliary Words and Endings [42](#Page_42)\
 \
 [Chapter X.](#CHAPTER_X)—Measure [44](#Page_44)\
 97. Definition.—Two essential characteristics. Rhythm vers measure.\
 98. Syncopation.\
 99. Simple and compound measures.\
 100. Commonest varieties.\
 101. Other varieties.\
 102. Rare varieties.\
 103. The signs, C and ![cut-time](images/cuttime.jpg "cut-time").\
 \
 [Chapter XI.](#CHAPTER_XI)—Tempo [48](#Page_48)\
 104. Misuses of the word "time."\
 105-107. How to correct these: by substituting "rhythm," "measure,"\
 and "tempo."\
 108. Three ways of finding the correct tempo.\
 109. A convenient grouping of tempo-terms.\
 \
 [Chapter XII.](#CHAPTER_XII)—Tempo (*continued*) [52](#Page_52)\
 110-119. Tempo-terms.\
 \
 [Chapter XIII.](#CHAPTER_XIII)—Dynamics [56](#Page_56)\
 120-131. Terms relating to dynamics.\
 \
 [Chapter XIV.](#CHAPTER_XIV)—Terms Relating to Forms and Styles
[62](#Page_62)\
 132. Definition of form.\
 133. Basis of form.\
 134. Difference between form and style.\
 135. Introductory.\
 136. Two styles.\
 137. Monophonic music.\
 138. Polyphonic music.\
 139. Counterpoint.\
 140. Imitation.\
 141. Canon.\
 142. School round.\
 143. Fugue.\
 \
 [Chapter XV.](#CHAPTER_XV)—Terms Relating to Forms and Styles
(*continued*) [67](#Page_67)\
 144. Phrase-section.\
 145. Period. Antecedent. Consequent.\
 146. Primary forms.\
 147. Theme.\
 148. Thematic development.\
 149. Rondo.\
 150. Suite.\
 151. Dances in suite.\
 152. Scherzo.\
 153. Sonata.\
 154. Trio. Quartet. Chamber Music.\
 155. Concerto.\
 156. Symphony.\
 157. Sonata-form.\
 158. Sonatina. Grand Sonata.\
 159. Program music.\
 160. Symphonic or tone poem.\
 \
 [Chapter XVI.](#CHAPTER_XVI)—Terms Relating to Vocal Music
[76](#Page_76)\
 161. Anthem.\
 162. A capella.\
 163. Motet.\
 164. Choral.\
 165. Mass.\
 166. Cantata.\
 167. Oratorio.\
 168. Opera.\
 169. Libretto.\
 170. Recitative.\
 171. Aria.\
 172. Lied.\
 173. Ballad.\
 174. Folk-song.\
 175. Madrigal.\
 176. Glee.\
 177. Part-song.\
 \
 [Chapter XVII.](#CHAPTER_XVII)—Rhythm, Melody, Harmony and Intervals
[82](#Page_82)\
 178. The four elements of music.\
 179. Rhythm.\
 180. Melody.\
 181. Harmony.\
 182. Timbre.\
 183. Interval—harmonic and melodic.\
 184. Number name and specific name.\
 185. Prime.\
 186. Second.\
 187. Third.\
 188. Fourth.\
 189. Fifth.\
 190. Sixth.\
 191. Seventh.\
 192. Octave.\
 193. Ninth.\
 194. Major, minor, perfect, diminished and augmented intervals.\
 195. Inverted intervals.\
 \
 [Chapter XVIII.](#CHAPTER_XVIII)—Chords, Cadences, etc. [87](#Page_87)\
 196. Chord. Triad. Root.\
 197. Major, minor, diminished, augmented triads.\
 198. The Common chords.\
 199. Fundamental position. First inversion. Second inversion.\
 200. Figured bass.\
 201. Seventh-chord. Ninth chord.\
 202. Cadence.\
 203. Authentic cadence.\
 204. Perfect authentic. Imperfect authentic.\
 205. Plagal cadence.\
 206. Half-cadence.\
 207. Deceptive cadence.\
 208. Sequence.\
 209. Modulation, harmonic and melodic: Dominant Seventh.\
 [Pg ix]210. Suspension.\
 211. Retardation.\
 212. Anticipation.\
 213. Pedal point.\
 214. Close and open position.\
 215. Transposition.\
 \
 [Chapter XIX.](#CHAPTER_XIX)—Miscellaneous Terms [95](#Page_95)\
 \
 [Chapter XX.](#CHAPTER_XX)—Miscellaneous Terms (*continued*)
[98](#Page_98)\
 \
 [Appendix A.](#APPENDIX_A)—The History of Music Notation
[101](#Page_101)\
 \
 [Appendix B.](#APPENDIX_B)—Musical Instruments [112](#Page_112)\
 1. Two classes.\
 2. Piano.\
 3, 4. Organ, reed and pipe.\
 5. Instruments used for ensemble playing.\
 6. Band.\
 7. Orchestra.\
 8. The stringed instruments.\
 9. Wood-wind.\
 10. Brass.\
 11. Percussion.\
 12. Proportion of instruments, in an orchestra.\
 13. Books recommended.\
 14. Violin.\
 15. Viola.\
 16. Violoncello.\
 17. Double-bass.\
 18. Flute.\
 19. Piccolo.\
 20. Oboe family.\
 21. Clarinet and bass clarinet; saxophone.\
 22. French horn.\
 23. Trumpet.\
 24. Cornet.\
 25. Trombone.\
 26. Tuba.\
 27. Kettle-drum.\
 28. Harp.\
 \
 [Appendix C.](#APPENDIX_C)—Acoustics [131](#Page_131)\
 1. Definition.\
 2. Sound, production of.\
 3. Sound, transmission of.\
 4. Rate of travel.\
 5. Intensification of.\
 6. Classification of.\
 7. Tones, properties of.\
 8. Pitch.\
 9. Intensity.\
 10. Quality.\
 11. Overtones.\
 12. Equal temperament.\
 13. Standards of pitch.\
 \
 [Appendix D.](#APPENDIX_D)—Terminology Reform [139](#Page_139)\
 \
 [Appendix E.](#APPENDIX_E)—Analysis of Beethoven Sonata, Op. 31, No. 3
[149](#Page_149)\
 \
 [Pronouncing Index](#INDEX) [159](#Page_159)\

* * * * *

[Pg 1]

CHAPTER I
---------

Some Principles of Correct Notation
-----------------------------------

​1. The *note* (from *nota*—Latin—a mark or sign) consists of either
one, two, or three parts, (![notes](images/notes.jpg "notes")) these
being referred to respectively as head, stem, and hook. The hook is
often called *tail* or cross-stroke. The stem appears on the right side
of the head when turned up, but on the left side when turned
down.[[1]](#Footnote_1_1) ![quarter
notes](images/quarter.jpg "quarter notes") The hook is always on the
right side.[[2]](#Footnote_2_2) ![eighth
notes](images/eighth.jpg "eighth notes")

In writing music with pen the head and hook are best made with a heavy
pressure on the pen point, but in writing at the board they are most
easily made by using a piece of chalk about an inch long, turned on its
side.

​2. When only one part (or voice) is written on the staff, the following
*rules for turning stems* apply: (1) If the note-head is *below* the
third line, the stem must turn up. (2) If the note-head is *above* the
third line the stem must turn down. (3) If the note-head is *on* the
third line the stem is turned either up or down with due regard to the
symmetrical appearance of the measure in which the note occurs. The
following examples will illustrate these points.

 

![Fig. 1](images/fig01.jpg "Fig. 1")

[[Listen]](music/fig01.mid)

[Pg 2]

 

​3. When two parts are written on the same staff, the stems of the upper
part all turn up, and those of the lower part turn down, in order that
the parts may be clearly distinguished. (Fig. 2.) But in music for piano
and other instruments on which complete chords can be sounded by *one*
performer and also in simple, four-part vocal music in which all voices
have approximately the same rhythm, several notes often have one stem in
common as in Fig. 3.

 

![Fig. 2](images/fig02.jpg "Fig. 2")

[[Listen]](music/fig02.mid)

 

![Fig. 3](images/fig03.jpg "Fig. 3")

[[Listen]](music/fig03.mid)

 

​4. Notes of small denomination (eighths and smaller) are often written
in groups of two or more, all stems in the group being then connected by
*one cross-stroke*. In such a case all the stems must of course be
turned the same way, the direction being determined by the position of
the majority of note-heads in the group. Notes thus *stroked* may be of
the same or of different denomination. See Fig. 4.

 

![Fig. 4](images/fig04.jpg "Fig. 4")

[[Listen]](music/fig04.mid)

 

In vocal music notes are never thus stroked when a syllable is given to
each note. (See [p. 19](#Page_19), [Sec. 55](#SEC_55), C.)

​5. *Rests*, like notes, are best made with a heavy pen stroke or by
using a piece of chalk on its side. (See note under [Sec. 1](#SEC_1).)
The double-whole rest, whole rest, and half rest occupy the third space
unless for the sake of clearness in writing two parts on the same staff
they are written higher or lower. The rests of smaller denomination may
be placed at any point on the staff, the hooks being always placed on
the spaces. The hook[Pg 3] of the eighth rest is usually placed on the
*third* space. Rests are sometimes dotted, but are never tied.

​6. The *G clef* should be begun at the second line rather than below
the staff. Experiments have shown clearly that beginners learn to make
it most easily in this way, and the process may be further simplified by
dividing it into two parts, thus, ![G clef](images/gclef.jpg "G clef").
The descending stroke crosses the ascending curve at or near the fourth
line. The circular part of the curve occupies approximately the first
and second spaces.

​7. The *F clef* is made either thus, ![bass
clef](images/bass.jpg "bass clef"), or thus, ![old bass
clef](images/oldbass.jpg "old bass clef") the dots being placed one on
either side of the fourth line of the staff, which is the particular
point that the clef marks. The C *clef* has also two forms, ![C
clef](images/cclef1.jpg "C clef") and ![C
clef](images/cclef2.jpg "C clef").

​8. The *sharp* is made with two light vertical strokes, and two heavy
slanting ones, the slant of the latter being upward from left to right,
♯. The sharp should never be made thus, \#.

The *double sharp* is made either thus
![double-sharp](images/doublesharp.jpg "double-sharp") or \*, the first
form being at present the more common.

​9. The *flat* is best made by a down stroke retraced part way up, the
curve being made without lifting pen from paper. The *double flat*
consists of two flats,[[3]](#Footnote_3_3) ♭♭. The *natural* or *cancel*
is made in two strokes, down-right and right-down, thus
![natural](images/natural.jpg "natural") ♮.

​10. The *tie* usually connects the *heads* of notes, thus
![tie](images/tie.jpg "tie").

​11. The *dot after a note* always appears on a space, whether the
note-head is on a line or space. (See Fig. 5.) In the case of a dot
after a note on a line, the dot usually appears on the space *above*
that line if the next note is higher in position and on the space below
it if the following note is lower.[Pg 4]

 

![Fig. 5](images/fig05.jpg "Fig. 5")

[[Listen]](music/fig05.mid)

 

*Note.*—Correct notation must be made a habit rather than a theory, and
in order to form the habit of writing correctly, *drill* is necessary.
This may perhaps be best secured by asking students to write (at the
board or on ruled paper) from verbal dictation, thus: Teacher says,

"Key of B♭, three-quarter measure: First measure, DO a quarter note, RE
a quarter, and MI a quarter. Second measure, SOL a quarter, LA a
quarter, and SOL a quarter. Third measure, LA, TI, DO, RE, MI, eighths,
stroked in pairs. Fourth measure, high DO a dotted half." Pupils respond
by writing the exercise dictated, after which mistakes in the turning of
stems, etc., are corrected. The *pitch names* may be dictated instead of
the syllables if desired, and still further practice may be provided by
asking that the exercise be transposed to other keys.

* * * * *

[Pg 5]

CHAPTER II
----------

Symbols of Music Defined
------------------------

​12. A *staff* is a collection of parallel lines, together with the
spaces belonging to them. The modern staff has five lines and six
spaces, these being ordinarily referred to as first line, second line,
third line, fourth line, and fifth line (beginning with the lowest); and
space below (*i.e.*, space below the first line), first space, second
space, third space, fourth space, and space above.

The definition and discussion above refer more specifically to one of
the portions of the "great staff," the latter term being often applied
to the combination of treble and bass staffs (with one leger line
between) so commonly used in piano music, etc.

​13. The *extent of the staff* may be increased either above or below by
the addition of short lines called *leger lines*,[[4]](#Footnote_4_4)
and notes may be written on either these lines or on the spaces above
and below them.

​14. The lines and spaces constituting the staff (including leger lines
if any) are often referred to as *staff degrees*, *i.e.*, each separate
line and space is considered to be "a degree of the staff." The tones of
a scale are also sometimes referred to as "degrees of the scale."

​15. A *clef*[[5]](#Footnote_5_5) is a sign placed on the staff to
designate what pitches are to be represented by its lines and spaces.
Thus, *e.g.*, the G clef shows us not only that the second line of the
staff represents G, but that the first line represents E, the first
space F, etc. The F clef similarly shows us that the fifth line[Pg 6] of
the bass staff represents the first A below middle C, the fourth line
the first F below middle C, etc.

The student should note that these clefs are merely modified forms of
the letters G and F, which (among others) were used to designate the
pitches represented by certain lines when staff notation was first
inaugurated. For a fuller discussion of this matter see [Appendix
A](#APPENDIX_A), [p. 101](#Page_101).

​16. When the G clef is used the staff is usually referred to as the
*treble staff*, and when the F clef is used, as the *bass staff*. Such
expressions as "singing from the treble clef," or "singing in the treble
clef," and "singing in the bass clef" are still frequently heard, but
are preferably replaced by "singing from the treble staff," and "singing
from the bass staff." Fig. 6 shows the permanent names of lines and
spaces when the G and F clefs are used.[[6]](#Footnote_6_6)

 

![Fig. 6](images/fig06.jpg "Fig. 6")

 

​17. *The movable C clef* ![C clef](images/cclef1.jpg "C clef") or ![C
clef](images/cclef2.jpg "C clef"), formerly in very common use, is now
utilized for only two purposes, viz., (1) in music written for certain
orchestral instruments (cello, viola, etc.) of extended range, in order
to avoid having to use too many leger lines; and (2) for indicating the
tenor part in vocal music. This latter usage seems also to be
disappearing however, and the tenor part is commonly written on the
treble staff, it being understood that the tones are to be sung an
octave lower than the notes would indicate.[Pg 7]

The C clef as used in its various positions is shown in Figs. 7, 8, and
9. It will be noted that in each case the line on which the clef is
placed represents "middle C."

 

![Figs. 7-9](images/fig07-09.jpg "Figs. 7-9")

 

​18. A *sharp* is a character which causes the degree of the staff with
which it is associated to represent a pitch one half-step higher than it
otherwise would.

Thus in Fig. 10 (*a*) the fifth line and first space represent the pitch
F, but in Fig. 10 (*b*) these same staff degrees represent an entirely
different tone—F♯. The student should note that the sharp does not then
*raise* anything; it merely causes a staff degree to represent a higher
tone than it otherwise would. There is just as much difference between F
and F♯ as between B and C, and yet one would never think of referring to
C as "B raised"!

 

![Fig. 10](images/fig10.jpg "Fig. 10")

 

​19. A *flat* is a character that causes the degree of the staff with
which it is associated to represent a tone one half-step lower than it
otherwise would. (See note under [Sec. 18](#SEC_18) and apply the same
discussion here.)

​20. A *double-sharp* causes the staff degree on which it is placed to
represent a pitch one whole-step higher than it would without any sharp.
Similarly, a double-flat causes the staff degree on which it is placed
to represent a pitch one whole-step lower than it would without any
flat.

Double-sharps and double-flats are generally used on staff degrees that
have already been sharped or flatted, therefore their practical effect
is to cause staff degrees to represent pitches respectively a half-step
higher and a half-step lower than would be represented by those same
degrees in their diatonic condition. Thus in Fig. 10 (*b*) the first
space in its diatonic condition[[7]](#Footnote_7_7) represents F-sharp,
and the double-sharp on this degree would cause it to represent a pitch
one-half step higher than F-sharp, *i.e.*, F-double-sharp.

* * * * *

[Pg 8]

CHAPTER III
-----------

Symbols of Music Defined (*Continued*)
--------------------------------------

​21. The *natural*[[8]](#Footnote_8_8) (sometimes called *cancel*)
annuls the effect of previous sharps, flats, double-sharps, and
double-flats, within the measure in which it occurs. After a
double-sharp or double-flat the combination of a natural with a sharp,
or a natural with a flat is often found: in this case only one sharp or
flat is annulled. (Sometimes also the single sharp or flat will be found
by itself, cancelling the double-sharp or double-flat). The natural is
often used when a composition changes key, as in Fig. 11, where a change
from E to G is shown.

 

![Fig. 11](images/fig11.jpg "Fig. 11")

 

​22. The group of sharps or flats (or absence of them) at the beginning
of a staff partially indicates the key in which the composition is
written. They are called collectively the *key-signature*.

​23. The same key-signature may stand for either one of two keys, the
major key, or its relative minor, hence in order to determine in what
key a melody is one must note whether the tones are grouped about the
major tonic DO or the minor tonic LA. In a harmonized composition it is
almost always possible to determine the key by referring to the last
bass note; if the final chord is clearly the DO chord the composition is
in the major key, but if this final chord is clearly the LA chord then
it is almost certain that the entire composition is in the[Pg 9] minor
key. Thus if a final chord appears as that in Fig. 12 the composition is
clearly in G major, while if it appears as in Fig. 13, it is just as
surely in E minor.

 

![Figs. 12-13](images/fig12-13.jpg "Figs. 12-13")

[[Listen]](music/fig12-13.mid)

 

​24. Sharps, flats, naturals, double-sharps and double-flats, occurring
in the course of the composition (*i.e.*, after the key signature) are
called *accidentals*, whether they actually cause a staff degree to
represent a different pitch as in Fig. 14 or simply make clear a
notation about which there might otherwise be some doubt as in Fig. 15,
measure two. The effect of such accidentals terminates at the bar.

 

![Figs. 14-15](images/fig14-15.jpg "Figs. 14-15")

[[Listen]](music/fig14-15.mid)

 

​25. In the case of a *tie across a bar* an accidental remains in force
until the combined value of the tied notes expires. In Fig. 16 first
measure, third beat, an accidental sharp makes the third space represent
the pitch C sharp. By virtue of the tie across the bar the third space
continues to represent C sharp thru the first beat of the second
measure, but for the remainder of the measure the third space will
represent C unless the sharp is repeated as in Fig. 17.

 

![Figs. 16-17](images/fig16-17.jpg "Figs. 16-17")

[[Listen]](music/fig16-17.mid)

 

​26. The following rules for making staff degrees represent pitches
different from those of the diatonic scale will be found useful by the
beginner in the study of music notation. These[Pg 10] rules are quoted
from "The Worcester Musical Manual," by Charles I. Rice.

​1. To sharp a natural degree, use a sharp. Fig. 18.\
 2. To sharp a sharped degree, use a double sharp. Fig. 19.\
 3. To sharp a flatted degree, use a natural. Fig. 20.\
 4. To flat a natural degree, use a flat. Fig. 21.\
 5. To flat a flatted degree, use a double flat. Fig. 22.\
 6. To flat a sharped degree, use a natural. Fig. 23.

 

![Figs. 18-23](images/fig18-23.jpg "Figs. 18-23")

[[Listen]](music/fig18-23.mid)

 

​27. When two different notations represent the same pitch, the word
*enharmonic* is applied. Thus we may say that F sharp and G flat (on
keyboard instruments at least) are enharmonically the same.

This word *enharmonic* is used in such expressions as enharmonic change,
enharmonic keys, enharmonic interval, enharmonic modulation, enharmonic
relation, etc., and in all such combinations it has the same meaning,
viz.—a change in notation but no change in the pitch represented.

​28. A *note* is a character expressing relative duration, which when
placed on a staff indicates that a certain tone is to be sounded for a
certain relative length of time. The pitch of the tone to be sounded is
shown by the position of the note on the staff, while the length of time
it is to be prolonged is shown by the shape of the note. Thus *e.g.*, a
half-note on the second line of the treble staff indicates that a
specific pitch (g') is to be played or sung for a period of time twice
as long as would be indicated by a quarter-note in the same composition.

​29. A *rest* is a character which indicates a rhythmic silence of a
certain relative length.[Pg 11]

​30. The *notes and rests in common use* are as follows:

  -------------------------------------------------------------- -------------------------------------------------------------------
  ![whole note](images/whole.jpg "whole note")                   Whole-note. An open note-head without stem.
  ![half note](images/half.jpg "half note")                      Half-note. An open note-head with stem.
  ![quarter note](images/quarter.jpg "quarter note")             Quarter-note. A closed note-head with stem.
  ![eighth note](images/eighth.jpg "eighth note")                Eighth-note. A closed note-head with stem and one hook.
  ![sixteenth note](images/sixteenth.jpg "sixteenth note")       Sixteenth-note. A closed note-head with stem and two hooks.
  ![32nd note](images/thirtysecond.jpg "32nd note")              Thirty-second-note. A closed note-head with stem and three hooks.
  ![whole rest](images/wholerest.jpg "whole rest")               Whole-rest.
  ![half rest](images/halfrest.jpg "half rest")                  Half-rest.
  ![quarter rest](images/quarterrest.jpg "quarter rest")         Quarter-rest.
  ![eighth rest](images/eighthrest.jpg "eighth rest")            Eighth-rest.
  ![sixteenth rest](images/sixteenthrest.jpg "sixteenth rest")   Sixteenth-rest.
  ![32nd rest](images/thirtysecondrest.jpg "32nd rest")          Thirty-second-rest.
  -------------------------------------------------------------- -------------------------------------------------------------------

​31. The *English names* for these notes are:

Whole-note—semi-breve.\
 Half-note—minim.\
 Quarter-note—crotchet.\
 Eighth-note—quaver.\
 Sixteenth-note—semi-quaver.\
 Thirty-second-note—demi-semi-quaver.\

The corresponding rests are referred to by the same system of
nomenclature: *e.g.*, *semi-breve rest*, etc.

​32. *Sixty-fourth* and *one-hundred-and-twenty-eighth-notes* are
occasionally found, but are not in common use. The *double-whole-note*
(*breve*), made ![breve](images/breve1.jpg "breve") or
![breve](images/breve2.jpg "breve"), is still used, especially in
English music, which frequently employs the half-note as the beat-unit.
Thus in four-half measure the breve would be necessary to indicate a
tone having four beats.

​33. The *whole-rest* has a peculiarity of usage not common to any of
the other duration symbols, viz., that it is often employed as a
*measure-rest*, filling an entire measure of beats, no matter what the
measure-signature may be. Thus, not only in four-quarter-measure, but in
two-quarter, three-quarter, six-eighth, and other varieties, the
whole-rest fills the[Pg 12] entire measure, having a value sometimes
greater, sometimes less than the corresponding whole-note. Because of
this peculiarity of usage the whole-rest is termed *Takt-pausa*
(measure-rest) by the Germans.

​34. A *bar* is a vertical line across the staff, dividing it into
measures. The word *bar* is often used synonymously with *measure* by
orchestral conductors and others; thus, "begin at the fourteenth bar
after J." This use of the word, although popular, is incorrect.

​35. A *double-bar* consists of two vertical lines across the staff, at
least one of the two being a heavy line. The double bar marks the end of
a division, movement, or entire composition.

* * * * *

[Pg 13]

CHAPTER IV
----------

Abbreviations, Signs, Etc.
--------------------------

​36. A *double bar* (or single heavy bar) with either two or four dots
indicates that a section is to be repeated. If the repeat marks occur at
only one point the entire preceding part is to be repeated, but if the
marks occur twice (the first time at the right of the bar but the second
time at the left), only the section thus enclosed by the marks is to be
repeated.

 

![double bar](images/doublebar.jpg "double bar")

 

​37. Sometimes a different cadence (or ending) is to be used for the
repetition, and this is indicated as in Fig. 24.

 

![Fig. 24](images/fig24.jpg "Fig. 24")

 

​38. The Italian word *bis* is occasionally used to indicate that a
certain passage or section is to be repeated. This use is becoming
obsolete.

​39. The words *da capo* (*D.C.*) mean literally "from the head,"
*i.e.*, repeat from the beginning. The words *dal segno* (*D.S.*)
indicate a repetition from the sign (![segno](images/segno1.jpg "segno")
or ![segno](images/segno2.jpg "segno")) instead of from the beginning.

In the case of both *D.C.* and *D.S.* the word *fine* (meaning literally
*the end*) is ordinarily used to designate the point at which the
repeated section is to terminate. The fermata
(![fermata](images/fermata.jpg "fermata")) was formerly in common use
for this same purpose, but is seldom so employed at present.[Pg 14]

*D.C.* (*sin*[[9]](#Footnote_9_9)) *al fine* means—repeat from the
beginning to the word "fine."

*D.C. al* ![fermata](images/fermata.jpg "fermata") means—repeat to the
fermata (or hold).

*D.C. senza repetizione*, or *D.C. ma senza repetizione*, both
mean—repeat from the beginning, but without observing other repeat marks
during the repetition.

*D.C. e poi la coda* means—repeat the first section only to the mark
![coda](images/coda.jpg "coda"), then skip to the coda. (See [p.
74](#Page_74), [Sec. 157](#SEC_157), for discussion of *coda*).

​40. In certain cases where the repetition of characteristic figures can
be indicated without causing confusion, it is the practice of composers
(especially in orchestral music) to make use of certain *signs of
repetition*. Some of the commonest of these abbreviations are shown in
the following examples.

 

![Figs. 25-27](images/fig25-27.jpg "Figs. 25-27")

[[Listen]](music/fig25-27.mid)

 

In Fig. 28 the repetition of an entire measure is called for.

 

![Fig. 28](images/fig28.jpg "Fig. 28")

[[Listen]](music/fig28.mid)

 

​41. The word *simile* (sometimes *segue*) indicates that a certain
effect previously begun is to be continued, as *e.g.*, staccato playing,
pedalling, style of bowing in violin music, etc. The word *segue* is
also occasionally used to show that an accompaniment figure (especially
in orchestral music) is to be continued.

​42. *When some part is to rest for two or more measures* several
methods of notation are possible. A rest of two measures is usually
indicated thus ![2-measure rest](images/2measrest.jpg "2-measure rest").
Three measures thus ![3-measure
rest](images/3measrest.jpg "3-measure rest"). Four measures thus
![4-measure rest](images/4measrest.jpg "4-measure rest"). Rests of more
than[Pg 15] four measures are usually indicated in one of the following
ways: ![multi-measure
rest](images/multimeasrest1.jpg "multi-measure rest"). Sometimes the
number of measures is written directly on the staff, thus;
![multi-measure rest](images/multimeasrest2.jpg "multi-measure rest").

​43. The letters G.P. (general pause, or grosse pause), the words *lunga
pausa*, or simply the word *lunga*, are sometimes written over a rest to
show that there is to be a prolonged pause or rest in all parts. Such
expressions are found only in ensemble music, *i.e.*, music in which
several performers are engaged at the same time.

​44. The *fermata* or *hold* ![fermata](images/fermata.jpg "fermata")
over a note or chord indicates that the tone is to be prolonged, the
duration of the prolongation depending upon the character of the music
and the taste of the performer or conductor. It has already been noted
that the hold over a bar was formerly used to designate the end of the
composition, as the word *fine* is employed at present, but this usage
has practically disappeared and the hold over the bar now usually
indicates a short rest between two sections of a composition.

​45. The sign *8va......* (an abbreviation of *all'ottava*, literally at
the octave) above the staff, indicates that all tones are to be sounded
an octave higher than the notes would indicate. When found below the
staff the same sign serves to indicate that the tones are to be sounded
an octave lower. The term *8va bassa* has also this latter
signification.

​46. Sometimes the word *loco* (in place) is used to show that the part
is no longer to be sounded an octave higher (or lower), but this is more
often indicated by the termination of the dotted (or wavy) line.

​47. The sign *Col 8* (*coll'ottava*—with the octave) shows that the
tones an octave higher or lower are to be sounded *with* the tones
indicated by the printed notes.

​48. For the sake of definiteness in referring to pitches, a particular
name is applied to each octave, and all pitches in[Pg 16] the octave are
referred to by means of a uniform nomenclature. The following figure
will make this system clear:

 

![Fig. 29](images/fig29.jpg "Fig. 29")

 

Thus *e.g.*, "great G" (written simply G), is the G represented by the
first line of the bass staff. Small A (written a), is represented by the
fifth line of the bass staff. Two-lined G, (written ![2-lined
G](images/2lineg.jpg "2-lined G")), is represented by the space above
the fifth line, treble staff. Three-lined C, (written ![3-lined
C](images/3linec.jpg "3-lined C")), is represented by the second added
line above the treble staff, etc. The *one-lined octave* may be
described as the octave from *middle C* to the B represented by the
third line of the treble staff, and any tone within that octave is
referred to as "one-lined." Thus—*one-lined* D, *one-lined* G, etc.

In scientific works on acoustics, etc., the pitches in the sub octave
(or sub-contra octave as it is often called) are referred to as C~2~,
D~2~, E~2~, etc.; those in the contra octave as C~1~, D~1~, etc.; in the
great octave, as c^1^, d^1^, etc.; in the small octave as c^2^, d^2^,
etc.

* * * * *

[Pg 17]

CHAPTER V
---------

Abbreviations, Signs, Etc., (*Continued*)
-----------------------------------------

​49. *A dot after a note* shows that the value of the note is to be half
again as great as it would be without the dot, *i.e.*, the value is to
be three-halves that of the original note.

 

![dotted notes](images/dot.jpg "dotted notes")

 

​50. *When two dots follow the note* the second dot adds half as much as
the first dot has added, *i.e.*, the entire value is seven-fourths that
of the original note.

 

![double dotted notes](images/2dot.jpg "double dotted notes")

 

​51. *When three dots follow the note* the third dot adds one-half the
value added by the second, *i.e.*, the entire value of the triple-dotted
note is fifteen-eighths that of the original note.

*Transcriber's Note:* Error in original; correct value is
fifteen-sixteenths

 

![triple dotted notes](images/3dot.jpg "triple dotted notes")

 

​52. *A dot over or under a note* is called the *staccato mark* and
indicates that the tone is to be sounded and then instantly released.
![staccato](images/staccato.jpg "staccato") In music for organ and for
some other instruments the staccato note is sometimes interpreted
differently, this depending on the character of the instrument.

On stringed instruments of the violin family the staccato effect is
usually secured by a long, rapid stroke of the bow for each tone; in the
case of harp and drum the hand is quickly brought in contact with the
vibrating body, thus stopping the tone instantly. On the organ the tone
is often prolonged to one-half the value of the printed note before the
keys are released.

​53. *The wedge-shaped dash over the note* (staccatissimo) was formerly
employed to indicate a tone still more detached[Pg 18] than that
indicated by the dot, but this sign is really superfluous, and is seldom
used at present.
![staccatissimo](images/staccatissimo.jpg "staccatissimo")

​54. *A tie* is a curved line connecting the heads of two notes that
call for the same tone. It indicates that they are to be sounded as one
tone having a duration equal to the combined value of both notes.
*E.g.*, a half-note tied to a quarter-note would indicate a tone equal
in duration-length to that shown by a dotted half-note; two half-notes
tied would indicate a tone equal in duration to that shown by a
whole-note. (See examples under Sections [49](#SEC_49), [50](#SEC_50),
and [51](#SEC_51)).

Fig. 30 illustrates the more common variety of tie, while Fig. 31 shows
an example of the *enharmonic[[10]](#Footnote_10_10) tie*.

 

![Figs. 30-31](images/ties.jpg "Figs. 30-31")

[[Listen]](music/fig30-31.mid)

 

​55. The *slur* is used in so many different ways that it is impossible
to give a general definition. It consists of a curved line, sometimes
very short (in which case it looks like the tie), but sometimes very
long, connecting ten, fifteen, or more notes. Some of the more common
uses of the slur are:

A. *To indicate legato* (sustained or connected) *tones*, as contrasted
with staccato (detached) ones.

In violin music this implies playing all tones thus slurred in one bow;
in music for the voice and for wind instruments it implies singing or
playing them in one breath.

B. *As a phrase-mark*, in the interpretation of which the first tone of
the phrase is often accented slightly, and the last one shortened in
value.

This interpretation of the phrase is especially common when the phrase
is short (as in the two-note phrase), and when the tones constituting
the phrase are of short duration, *e.g.*, the phrase given in Fig. 32
would be played approximately as written in Fig. 33.

 

![Figs. 32-33](images/fig32-33.jpg "Figs. 32-33")

[[Listen]](music/fig32-33.mid)

 

[Pg 19]

But if the notes are of greater value, especially in slow tempi, the
slur merely indicates legato, *i.e.*, sustained or connected rendition.
Fig. 34 illustrates such a case.

 

![Fig. 34](images/fig34.jpg "Fig. 34")

[[Listen]](music/fig34.mid)

 

This is a matter of such diverse usage that it is difficult to
generalize regarding it. The tendency seems at present to be in the
direction of using the slur (*in instrumental music*) as a phrase-mark
exclusively, it being understood that unless there is some direction to
the contrary, the tones are to be performed in a connected manner.

C. In vocal music, to show that two or more tones are to be sung to one
syllable of text. See Fig. 35.

 

![Fig. 35](images/fig35.jpg "Fig. 35")

[[Listen]](music/fig35.mid)

 

In notes of small denomination (eighths and smaller) this same thing is
often indicated by *stroking* the stems together as in Fig. 36. This can
only be done in cases where the natural grouping of notes in the measure
will not be destroyed.

 

![Fig. 36](images/fig36.jpg "Fig. 36")

[[Listen]](music/fig36.mid)

 

D. To mark special note-groups (triplets, etc.), in which case the slur
is accompanied by a figure indicating the number of notes in the group.
See Fig. 37 (*a*)

The most common of these irregular note-groups is the *triplet*, which
consists of three notes to be performed in the time ordinarily given to
two of the same value. Sometimes the triplet consists of only two notes
as in Fig. 37 (*b*). In such a case the first two of the three notes
composing the triplet are considered to be tied.

 

![Fig. 37](images/fig37.jpg "Fig. 37")

[[Listen]](music/fig37.mid)

 

[Pg 20]

When the triplet form is perfectly obvious, the Fig. 3 (as well as the
slur) may be omitted.

Other examples of irregular note-groups, together with the names
commonly applied, follow.

 

![irregular note groups](images/doublet.jpg "irregular note groups")

 

​56. The *combination of slur or tie and dots* over the notes indicates
that the tones are to be somewhat detached, but not sharply so. ![slur
and dots](images/slurdots.jpg "slur and dots")

This effect is sometimes erroneously termed *portamento* (lit.
*carrying*), but this term is more properly reserved for an entirely
different effect, *viz.*, when a singer, or player on a stringed
instrument, passes from a high tone to a low one (or vice versa)
touching lightly on some or all of the diatonic tones between the two
melody tones.

​57. The horizontal *dash over a note* ![dash over
note](images/dashnote.jpg "dash over note") indicates that the tone is
to be slightly accented, and sustained. This mark is also sometimes used
after a staccato passage to show that the tones are no longer to be
performed in detached fashion, but are to be sustained. This latter use
is especially common in music for stringed instruments.

​58. The combination of *dash and dot over a note* ![dash and dot over
note](images/dashdot.jpg "dash and dot over note") indicates that the
tone is to be slightly accented and separated from its neighboring
tones.

​59. *Accent marks* are made in a variety of fashions. The most common
forms follow. ![accents](images/accents.jpg "accents") *sf* *fz*. All
indicate that a certain tone or chord is to be differentiated from its
neighboring tones or chords by receiving a certain relative amount of
stress.

​60. In music for keyboard instruments it is sometimes necessary to
indicate that a certain part is to be played by a certain hand. The
abbreviations r.h. (right hand), m.d. (mano destra, It.), and m.d. (main
droite, Fr.), designate that a passage or tone is to be played with the
right hand, while l.h. (left hand), m.s. (mano sinistra, It.), and m.g.
(main gauche, Fr.), show that the left hand is to be employed.[Pg 21]

​61. *The wavy line placed vertically beside a chord*
![arpeggio](images/arpeggio.jpg "arpeggio") indicates that the tones are
to be sounded consecutively instead of simultaneously, beginning with
the lowest tone, all tones being sustained until the duration-value of
the chord has expired. This is called *arpeggio playing*. When the wavy
line extends through the entire chord (covering both staffs) as in Fig.
38, all the tones of the chord are to be played one after another,
beginning with the lowest: but if there is a separate wavy line for each
staff as at Fig. 39 then the lowest tone represented on the upper staff
is to be played simultaneously with the lowest tone represented on the
bass staff.

 

![Figs. 38-39](images/fig38-39.jpg "Figs. 38-39")

[[Listen]](music/fig38-39.mid)

 

The word arpeggio (plural arpeggi) is a derivation of the Italian word
*arpa* (meaning harp), and from this word *arpa* and its corresponding
verb *arpeggiare* (to play on the harp) are derived also a number of
other terms commonly used in instrumental music. Among these
are—arpeggiamento, arpeggiando, arpeggiato, etc., all of these terms
referring to a *harp style* of performance, the tones being sounded one
after another in rapid succession instead of simultaneously as on the
piano.

​62. The sign
![crescendo-decrescendo](images/cresc-decresc.jpg "crescendo-decrescendo")
over a note indicates that the tone is to be begun softly, gradually
increased in power, and as gradually decreased again, ending as softly
as it began. In vocal music this effect is called *messa di voce*.

​63. In music for stringed instruments of the violin family, the sign
![downbow](images/downbow.jpg "downbow") indicates down-bow and the sign
![upbow](images/upbow.jpg "upbow") up-bow. In cello music the down-bow
sign is sometimes written ![cello
downbow](images/cellobow.jpg "cello downbow").

* * * * *

[Pg 22]

CHAPTER VI
----------

Embellishments
--------------

​64. *Embellishments (or graces) (Fr. agréments*) are ornamental tones,
either represented in full in the score or indicated by certain signs.
The following are the embellishments most commonly found: Trill (or
shake), mordent, inverted mordent (or prall trill), turn (gruppetto),
inverted turn, appoggiatura and acciaccatura.

Usage varies greatly in the interpretation of the signs representing
these embellishments and it is impossible to give examples of all the
different forms. The following definitions represent therefore only the
most commonly found examples and the most generally accepted
interpretations.

​65. The *trill (or shake*) consists of the rapid alternation of two
tones to the full value of the printed note. The lower of these two
tones is represented by the printed note, while the upper one is the
next higher tone in the diatonic scale of the key in which the
composition is written. The interval between the two tones may therefore
be either a half-step or a whole-step.

Whether the trill is to begin with the principal tone (represented by
the printed note) or with the one above is a matter of some dispute
among theorists and performers, but it may safely be said that the
majority of modern writers on the subject would have it begin on the
principal tone rather than on the tone above. Fig. 40.

When the principal note is preceded by a small note on the degree above,
it is of course understood that the trill begins on the tone above. Fig.
41.

The trill is indicated by the sign ![trill](images/trill.jpg "trill").

 

![Fig. 40](images/fig40.jpg "Fig. 40")

[[Listen]](music/fig40.mid)

[Pg 23]

 

![Fig. 41](images/fig41.jpg "Fig. 41")

[[Listen]](music/fig41.mid)

 

The above examples would be termed *perfect trills* because they close
with a turn. By inference, an *imperfect trill* is one closing without a
turn.

​66. The *mordent* ![mordent](images/mordent.jpg "mordent") consists of
three tones; first the one represented by the printed note; second the
one next below it in the diatonic scale; third the one represented by
the printed note again.

 

![Fig. 42](images/fig42.jpg "Fig. 42")

[[Listen]](music/fig42.mid)

 

​67. The *double (or long) mordent* has five tones (sometimes seven)
instead of three, the first two of the three tones of the regular
mordent being repeated once or more. (See Fig. 43.)

In the case of both mordent and double-mordent the tones are sounded as
quickly as possible, the time taken by the embellishment being
subtracted from the value of the principal note as printed.

 

![Fig. 43](images/fig43.jpg "Fig. 43")

[[Listen]](music/fig43.mid)

 

​68. The *inverted mordent* ![inverted
mordent](images/invmordent.jpg "inverted mordent") (note the absence of
the vertical line) is like the mordent except that the tone below is
replaced by the tone above in each case. This ornament is sometimes
called a "transient shake" because it is really only a part of the more
elaborate grace called "trill." (See Fig. 44.)[Pg 24]

 

![Fig. 44](images/fig44.jpg "Fig. 44")

[[Listen]](music/fig44.mid)

 

The confusion at present attending the interpretation of the last two
embellishments described, might be largely obviated if the suggestion of
a recent writer[[11]](#Footnote_11_11) to call the one the *upward
mordent*, and the other the *downward mordent* were to be universally
adopted.

​69. The *turn* consists of four tones; first, the diatonic scale-tone
above the principal tone; second, the principal tone itself; third, the
tone below the principal tone; and fourth, the principal tone again.

When the sign (![turn](images/turn1.jpg "turn") or
![turn](images/turn2.jpg "turn")) occurs over a note of small value in
rapid tempo (Fig. 45) the turn consists of four tones of equal value;
but if it occurs over a note of greater value, or in a slow tempo, the
tones are usually played quickly (like the mordent), and the fourth tone
is then held until the time-value of the note has expired. (Fig. 46.)

 

![Figs. 45-46](images/fig45-46.jpg "Figs. 45-46")

[[Listen]](music/fig45-46.mid)

 

​70. *When the turn-sign is placed a little to the right of the note*
the principal tone is sounded first and held to almost its full
time-value, then the turn is played just before the next tone of the
melody. In this case the four tones are of equal length as in the first
example. (See Fig. 47.)

 

![Fig. 47](images/fig47.jpg "Fig. 47")

[[Listen]](music/fig47.mid)

 

The student should note the difference between these two effects; in the
case of a turn *over* the note the turn comes at the beginning, but in
the case of the sign *after* the note the turn comes at the very end.
But in both cases the time taken by the embel[Pg 25]lishment is taken
from the time-value of the principal note. For further details see
Grove's Dictionary of Music and Musicians, Vol. V, p. 184. Also Elson,
op. cit. p. 274.

​71. Sometimes an accidental occurs with the turn, and in this case when
written above the sign it refers to the highest tone of the turn, but
when written below, to the lowest (Fig. 48).

 

![Fig. 48](images/fig48.jpg "Fig. 48")

[[Listen]](music/fig48.mid)

 

​72. In the *inverted turn* the order of tones is reversed, the lowest
one coming first, the principal tone next, the highest tone third, and
the principal tone again, last.

 

![Fig. 49](images/fig49.jpg "Fig. 49")

[[Listen]](music/fig49.mid)

 

​73. The *appoggiatura* (lit. *leaning note*) consists of an ornamental
tone introduced before a tone of a melody, thus delaying the melody tone
until the ornamental tone has been heard. The time taken for this
ornamental tone is taken from that of the melody tone.

The appoggiatura was formerly classified into *long appoggiatura* and
*short appoggiatura*, but modern writers seem to consider the term
"short appoggiatura" to be synonymous with
acciaccatura[[12]](#Footnote_12_12), and to avoid confusion the word
*acciaccatura* will be used in this sense, and defined under its own
heading.

​74. Three rules for the interpretation of the appoggiatura are commonly
cited, viz.:

​(1) When it is possible to divide the principal tone into halves, then
the appoggiatura receives one-half the value of the printed note. (Fig.
50.)[Pg 26]

​(2) When the principal note is dotted (division into halves being
therefore not possible), the appoggiatura receives two-thirds of the
value. (Fig. 51.)

​(3) When the principal note is tied to a note of smaller denomination
the appoggiatura receives the value of the first of the two notes. (Fig.
52.)

 

![Figs. 50-52](images/fig50-52.jpg "Figs. 50-52")

[[Listen]](music/fig50-52.mid)

 

​75. The *acciaccatura* (or short appoggiatura) is written like the
appoggiatura except that it has a light stroke across its stem.
![acciaccatura](images/acciaccatura.jpg "acciaccatura") It has no
definite duration-value, but is sounded as quickly as possible, taking
its time from that of the principal tone. The appoggiatura is always
accented, but the acciaccatura never is, the stress always falling on
the melody tone. (See Grove, op. cit. Vol. I, p. 96.)

The use of embellishments is on the wane, and the student of to-day
needs the above information only to aid him in the interpretation of
music written in previous centuries. In the early days of instrumental
music it was necessary to introduce graces of all sorts because the
instruments in use were not capable of sustaining tone for any length of
time; but with the advent of the modern piano with its comparatively
great sustaining power, and also with the advent in vocal music of a new
style of singing (German Lieder singing as contrasted with Italian
coloratura singing), ornamental tones were used less and less, and when
found now are usually written out in full in the score instead of being
indicated by signs.

* * * * *

[Pg 27]

CHAPTER VII
-----------

Scales
------

​76. A *scale* (from *scala*, a Latin word meaning *ladder*; Ger.
*Ton-leiter*) is an ascending or descending series of tones, progressing
according to some definite system, and all bearing (in the case of
tonality scales at least) a very intimate relation to the first tone—the
*key-tone* or *tonic*. (See [p. 28](#Page_28), [Sec. 78](#SEC_78); also
note 1 at bottom of[p. 38](#Page_38).)

Many different kinds of scales have existed in various musical eras, the
point of resemblance among them all being the fact that they have all
more or less recognized the *octave* as the natural limit of the series.
The difference among the various scales has been in the selection of
intervals between the scale-tones, and, consequently, in the number of
tones within the octave. Thus *e.g.*, in our major scale the intervals
between the tones are all whole-steps except two (which are half-steps),
and the result is a scale of *eight* tones (including in this number
both the key-tone and its octave): but in the so-called *pentatonic*
scale of the Chinese and other older civilizations we find larger
intervals (*e.g.*, the step-and-a-half), and consequently a smaller
number of tones within the octave. Thus in the scale upon which many of
the older Scotch folk songs are based the intervals are arranged as
follows:

  --- -------- --- -------- --- ------------ --- -------- --- ------------ ---
  1   whole\   2   whole\   3   step-and-\   4   whole\   5   step-and-\   6
      step         step         a-half           step         a-half       
  --- -------- --- -------- --- ------------ --- -------- --- ------------ ---

The result is a scale of six tones, corresponding approximately with
C—D—E—G—A—C in our modern system.

The term *pentatonic* is thus seen to be a misnomer since the sixth tone
is necessary for the completion of the series, just as the eighth tone
is essential in our diatonic scales.

The following Chinese tune (called "Jasmine") is based on the pentatonic
scale.

 

![Jasmine](images/jasmine.jpg "Jasmine")

[[Listen]](music/jasmine.mid)

 

[Pg 28]

​77. In studying the theory of the scale the student should bear in mind
the fact that a scale is not an arbitrary series of tones which some one
has invented, and which others are required to make use of. It is rather
the result of accustoming the ear to certain melodic combinations (which
were originally hit upon by accident), and finally analyzing and
systematizing these combinations into a certain definite order or
arrangement. The application of this idea may be verified when it is
recalled that most primitive peoples have invented melodies of some
sort, but that only in modern times, and particularly since the
development of instrumental music, have these melodies been analyzed,
and the scale upon which they have been based, discovered, the inventors
of the melodies being themselves wholly ignorant of the existence of
such scales.

​78. A *key* is a number of tones grouping themselves naturally (both
melodically and harmonically) about a central tone—the key tone. The
word *tonality* is often used synonymously with *key* in this sense.

The difference between *key* and *scale* is therefore this, that while
both *key* and *scale* employ the same tone material, by *key* we mean
the material in general, without any particular order or arrangement in
mind, while by *scale* we mean the same tones, but now arranged into a
regular ascending or descending series. It should be noted in this
connection also that not all scales present an equally good opportunity
of having their tones used as a basis for tonality or key-feeling:
neither the chromatic nor the whole-step scale possess the necessary
characteristics for being used as tonality scales in the same sense that
our major and minor scales are so used.

​79. There are *three general classes of scales* extant at the present
time, viz.: (1) Diatonic; (2) Chromatic; (3)
Whole-tone.[[13]](#Footnote_13_13)

​80. The word *diatonic* means "through the tones" (*i.e.*, through the
tones of the key), and is applied to both major and minor scales of our
modern tonality system. In general a diatonic scale may be defined as
one which proceeds by half-steps and whole-steps. There is, however, one
exception to[Pg 29] this principle, viz., in the progression six to
seven in the harmonic minor scale, which is of course a step-and-a-half.
(See [p. 33](#Page_33), [Sec. 86](#SEC_86).)

​81. A *major diatonic scale* is one in which the intervals between the
tones are arranged as follows:

  --- -------- --- -------- --- ------- --- -------- --- -------- --- -------- --- ------- ---
  1   whole\   2   whole\   3   half\   4   whole\   5   whole\   6   whole\   7   half\   8
      step         step         step        step         step         step         step    
  --- -------- --- -------- --- ------- --- -------- --- -------- --- -------- --- ------- ---

In other words, a major diatonic scale is one in which the intervals
between three and four, and between seven and eight are half-steps, all
the others being whole-steps. A composition based on this scale is said
to be written in the major mode, or in a major key. The major diatonic
scale may begin on any one of the twelve pitches C, C♯ or D♭, D, D♯ or
E♭, E, F, F♯ or G♭, G, G♯ or A♭, A, A♯ or B♭, B, but in each case it is
the same scale because the intervals between its tones are the same. We
have then one major scale only, but this scale may be written in many
different positions, and may be sung or played beginning on any one of a
number of different pitches.

​82. It is interesting to note that the major scale consists of two
identical series of four tones each; *i.e.*, the first four tones of the
scale are separated from one another by exactly the same intervals and
these intervals appear in exactly the same order as in the case of the
last four tones of the scale. Fig. 53 will make this clear. The first
four tones of any diatonic scale (major or minor) are often referred to
as the *lower tetrachord*[[14]](#Footnote_14_14) and the upper four
tones as the *upper tetrachord*.

 

![Fig. 53](images/fig53.jpg "Fig. 53")

[[Listen]](music/fig53.mid)

[Pg 30]

 

It is interesting further to note that the upper tetrachord of any
*sharp* scale is always used without change as the lower tetrachord of
the next major scale involving sharps, while the lower tetrachord of any
*flat* scale is used as the upper tetrachord of the next flat scale. See
Figs. 54 and 55.

 

![Figs. 54-55](images/fig54-55.jpg "Figs. 54-55")

[[Listen]](music/fig54-55.mid)

 

​83. From the standpoint of staff notation the major scale may be
written in fifteen different positions, as follows:

 

![scales](images/scales.jpg "scales")

![scales](images/scales2.jpg "scales")

[[Listen]](music/scales.mid)

 

[Pg 31]

It will be observed that in the above series of scales those beginning
on F♯ and G♭ call for the same keys on the piano, *i.e.*, while the
notation is different, the actual tones of the scale are the same. The
scales of C♯ and D♭ likewise employ the same tones. When two scales thus
employ the same tones[Pg 32] but differ in notation they are said to be
*enharmonic*, (cf. [p. 38](#Page_38), [Sec. 93](#SEC_93).)

*Note*.—The student is advised to adopt some uniform method of writing
scales, preferably the one followed in those given above, the necessary
sharps and flats appearing before the notes in the scale and then
repeated collectively at the end as a signature. He is also advised to
repeat these scales and signatures over and over until absolute
familiarity is attained. *E.g.*, E—F♯—G♯—A—B—C♯—D♯—E; signature, four
sharps, F, C, G, and D.

* * * * *

[Pg 33]

CHAPTER VIII
------------

Scales (*Continued*)
--------------------

​84. The *minor diatonic scale* is used in several slightly different
forms, but the characteristic interval between the first and third tones
(which differentiates it from the major scale) remains the same in every
case. This interval between the first and third tones consists of four
half-steps in the major scale and of three half-steps in the minor scale
and this difference in size has given rise to the designation *major*
for the scale having the larger third, and *minor* for the scale having
the smaller one.

​85. *The original (or primitive) form* of the minor scale has its tones
arranged as follows.

  --- -------- --- ------- --- -------- --- ------- --- ------- --- -------- --- -------- ---
  1   whole\   2   half\   3   whole\   4   half\   5   half\   6   whole\   7   whole\   8
      step         step        step         step        step        step         step     
  --- -------- --- ------- --- -------- --- ------- --- ------- --- -------- --- -------- ---

As its name implies, this is the oldest of the three forms (being
derived from the old Greek Aeolian scale), but because of the absence of
a "leading tone" it is suitable for the simplest one-part music only,
and is therefore little used at present.

​86. *The harmonic minor scale* is like the primitive form except that
it substitutes a tone one half-step higher for the seventh tone of the
older (*i.e.*, the primitive) form. This change was made because the
development of writing music in several parts (particularly *harmonic*
part-writing) made necessary a "leading tone," *i.e.*, a tone with a
strong tendency to move on up to the key-tone as a closing point. In
order[Pg 34] to secure a tone with such a strongly upward tendency the
interval between *seven* and *eight* had to be reduced in size to a
half-step. It should be noted that this change in the seventh tone of
the scale caused an interval of a step-and-a-half between the sixth and
seventh tones of the scale.

  --- -------- --- ------- --- -------- --- -------- --- ------- --- ----------- --- ------- ---
  1   whole\   2   half\   3   whole\   4   whole\   5   half\   6   step and\   7   half\   8
      step         step        step         step         step        a half          step    
  --- -------- --- ------- --- -------- --- -------- --- ------- --- ----------- --- ------- ---

​87. *The melodic minor scale* substitutes a tone one half-step higher
than six as well as one a half-step higher than seven, but this change
is made in the ascending scale only, the descending scale being like the
primitive form. The higher sixth (commonly referred to as the "raised
sixth") was used to get rid of the unmelodic interval of a
step-and-a-half[[15]](#Footnote_15_15) (augmented second), while the
return to the primitive form in descending is made because the ascending
form is too much like the tonic major scale.

  --- -------- --- ------- --- -------- --- -------- --- -------- --- -------- --- ------- ---
  1   whole\   2   half\   3   whole\   4   whole\   5   whole\   6   whole\   7   half\   8
      step         step        step         step         step         step         step    
  --- -------- --- ------- --- -------- --- -------- --- -------- --- -------- --- ------- ---

  --- -------- --- ------- --- -------- --- -------- --- ------- --- -------- ---
  7   whole\   6   half\   5   whole\   4   whole\   3   half\   2   whole\   1
      step         step        step         step         step        step     
  --- -------- --- ------- --- -------- --- -------- --- ------- --- -------- ---

This form is used only to a very limited extent, and then principally in
vocal music, the harmonic form being in almost universal use in spite of
the augmented second.

​88. The minor scale in its various positions (up to five sharps and
five flats) and in all three forms follows: a composition based on any
one of these forms (or upon a mixture of them, which often occurs) is
said to be *in the minor mode*. It will be noted that the first four
tones are alike in all three forms; *i.e.*, the lower tetrachord in the
minor scale is invariable no matter, what may happen to the upper
tetrachord. The sign + marks the step-and-a-half.[Pg 35]

 

![minor scales](images/minorscales.jpg "minor scales")

[[Enlarge]](images/minorscaleslg.jpg)

[[Listen to A minor scales]](music/minor.mid)

 

*Note.*—The student is advised to recite the *harmonic form* of the
minor scale as was suggested in the case of the major scale, noting that
the "raised seventh" does not affect the key-signature.
*E.g.*,—E—F♯—G—A—B—C—D♯—E; signature, one sharp, F.

[Pg 36]

​89. A minor scale having the same signature as a major scale is said to
be its *relative minor*. *E.g.*,—e is the relative minor of G, c of E♭,
d of F, etc., the small letter being used to refer to the minor key or
scale, while the capital letter indicates the major key or scale unless
accompanied by the word *minor*. Relative keys are therefore defined as
those having the same signature. G and e are relative keys, as are also
A and f♯, etc.

​90. A minor scale beginning with the same tone as a major scale is
referred to as its *tonic minor*. Thus, *e.g.*, c with three flats in
its signature is the tonic minor of C with all degrees in natural
condition; e with one sharp is the tonic minor of E with four sharps,
etc. Tonic keys are therefore those having the same key-tone.

​91. The eight tones of the diatonic scale (both major and minor) are
often referred to by specific names, as follows:

​1. *Tonic*—the tone. (This refers to the fact that the tonic is the
principal tone, or generating tone of the key, *i.e.*, it is *the*
tone.)

​2. *Super-tonic*—above the tone.

​3. *Mediant*—midway between tonic and dominant.

​4. *Sub-dominant*—the under dominant. (This name does not refer to the
position of the tone under the dominant but to the fact that the fifth
below the tonic is also a dominant tone—the under dominant—just as the
fifth above is the upper dominant).

​5. *Dominant*—the governing tone. (From the Latin word *dominus*
meaning *master*.)

​6. *Super-dominant*—above the dominant. Or *Sub-mediant*—midway between
tonic and sub-dominant.

​7. *Leading tone*—the tone which demands resolution to the tonic
(one-half step above it).

​8. *Octave*—the eighth tone.

[Pg 37]

​92. The syllables commonly applied to the various major and minor
scales in teaching sight-singing are as follows:[[16]](#Footnote_16_16)

Major—DO, RE, MI, FA, SOL, LA, TI, DO.\
 \
 Minor[[17]](#Footnote_17_17)—original—LA, TI, DO, RE, MI, FA, SOL, LA.\
 harmonic—LA, TI, DO, RE, MI, FA, SI, LA.\
 melodic —LA, TI, DO, RE, MI, FI, SI, LA, SOL, FA, MI, RE, DO, TI, LA.\

It is interesting to study the changes in both spelling and
pronunciation that have occurred (and are still occurring) in these
syllables. The first one (ut) was changed to *DO* as early as the
sixteenth century because of the difficulty of producing a good singing
tone on *ut*. For the same reason and also in order to avoid having two
diatonic syllables with the same initial letter, the tonic-sol-fa system
(invented in England about 1812 and systematized about 1850) changed SI
to TI and this change has been almost universally adopted by teachers of
sight-singing in this country. The more elaborate tonic-sol-fa spelling
of the diatonic syllables (DOH, LAH, etc.), has not, however, been
favorably received in this country and the tendency seems to be toward
still further simplification rather than toward elaboration. It is
probable that further changes in both spelling and pronunciation will be
made in the near future, one such change that seems especially desirable
being some other syllable than RE for the second tone of the major
scale, so that the present syllable may be reserved for "flat-two," thus
providing a uniform vowel-sound for all intermediate tones of the
descending chromatic scale, as is already the case in the ascending
form.

[Pg 38]

​93. The *chromatic scale*[[18]](#Footnote_18_18) is one which proceeds
always by half-steps. Its intervals are therefore always equal no matter
with what tone it begins. Since, however, we have (from the standpoint
of the piano keyboard) five pairs of tones[[19]](#Footnote_19_19) which
are enharmonically the same, it may readily be seen that the chromatic
scale might be notated in all sorts of fashions, and this is in fact the
real status of the matter, there being no one method uniformly agreed
upon by composers.

Parry (Grove's Dictionary, article *chromatic*) recommends writing the
scale with such accidentals as can occur in chromatic chords without
changing the key in which the passage occurs. Thus, taking C as a type,
"the first accidental will be D♭, as the upper note of the minor ninth
on the tonic; the next will be E♭, the minor third of the key; the next
F♯, the major third of the super-tonic—all of which can occur without
causing modulation—and the remaining two will be A♭ and B♭, the minor
sixth and seventh of the key." According to this plan the chromatic
scale beginning with C would be spelled—C, D♭, D, E♭, E, F, F♯, G, A♭,
A, B♭, B, C—the form being the same both ascending and descending. This
is of course written exclusively from a harmonic standpoint and the
advantage of such a form is its definiteness.

​94. For *sight-singing purposes* the chromatic
scale[[20]](#Footnote_20_20) is usually written by representing the
intermediate tones in ascending by sharps, (in some cases naturals and
double-sharps), and the intermediate tones in descending by flats
(sometimes naturals and double-flats). The chromatic scale in nine
different positions, written from this standpoint, follows, and the
syllables most commonly applied in sight-singing have also been added.
In the first two scales the student of harmony is asked to note that
because of the very common prac[Pg 39]tice of modulating to the dominant
and sub-dominant keys, the intermediate tones ♯4 and ♭7 are quite
universally used in both ascending and descending melody passages. In
other words the scales that follow would more nearly represent actual
usage if in each case ♯4 (FI) were substituted for ♭5 (SE) in the
descending scale; and if ♭7 (TE) were substituted for ♯6 (LI) in the
ascending form.

 

![chromatic scales](images/chromatic.jpg "chromatic scales")

![chromatic scales](images/chromatic2.jpg "chromatic scales")

[[Listen to C chromatic scale]](music/chromatic.mid)

 

[Pg 40]

*Note.*—In writing chromatic scales from this sight-singing standpoint
the student is urged to adopt a three-step process; first, writing the
major diatonic scale both ascending and descending; second, marking the
half-steps; third, inserting accidental notes calling for the
intermediate tones. In the above chromatic scales these intermediate
tones have been represented by black note-heads so as to differentiate
them from the notes representing diatonic scale tones.

​95. The *whole-step scale* (the third type mentioned in [Sec.
79](#SEC_79)) is, as its name implies, a scale in which the intervals
between the tones consist in every instance of whole-steps. This reduces
the number of tones in the scale to seven. Beginning with C the scale
reads: C, D, E, F♯ or G♭, A♭, B♭, C. This scale has been used somewhat
extensively by the ultramodern French school of composition represented
by Debussy, Ravel, and others, but is not making any progress toward
universal adoption. The remarks of a recent English
writer[[21]](#Footnote_21_21) on this subject may be interesting to the
student who is puzzled by the apparent present-day tendencies of French
music. He says:

"The student of some interesting modern developments will also speedily
discover that the adoption of the so-called whole-tone scale as a basis
of music is, except upon a keyed instrument tuned to the compromise of
equal temperament, unnatural and impossible. No player upon a stringed
instrument can play the scale of whole-tones and arrive at an octave
which is in tune with the starting note, unless he deliberately changes
one of the notes on the road and alters it while playing it. The obvious
result of the application of the whole-tone scale to an orchestra or a
string quartet would be to force them to adopt the equal temperament of
the pianoforte, and play every interval except the octave out of tune.
When this modification had taken hold all music in the pure scale would
be distorted and destroyed, unless string players were to face the[Pg
41] practically impossible drudgery of studying both the equal
temperament and the pure scale from the start, and were able to tackle
either form at a moment's notice. A thorough knowledge of the natural
genesis of the scale of western nations will be the best antidote to
fads founded upon ignorance of it. It is a curious commentary upon this
question that Wagner, in the opening of the third act of *Tristan* (bars
6 to 10), experimented with the whole-tone scale and drew his pen
through it, as was to be expected from a composer whose every work
proves the writer to have had the pure scale inbred in him."

There may be some difference of opinion among acousticians as to whether
Mr. Stanford is correct in his scientific assumptions regarding the
difference between "tempered" and "pure" scales,[[22]](#Footnote_22_22)
but even so, there is a far more potent reason why the whole-step scale
will probably never become popular as the major and minor scales now
are, viz., the fact that it offers no possibility of *inculcating
tonality feeling*, which has always been the basis of even the simplest
primitive music. Tonality scales give rise to a feeling of alternate
periods of contraction and relaxation—an active tone (or chord) followed
by a passive one, but no such effect is possible in the whole-step
scale, and it seems suitable therefore only for that class of music
whose outlines are *purposely intended to be* vague and indefinite—the
impressionistic style of music writing.

* * * * *

[Pg 42]

CHAPTER IX
----------

Auxiliary Words and Endings
---------------------------

​96. Being a list of articles, adverbs, conjunctions, prepositions, and
endings, often utilized in compounding terms relating to musical
effects.

*A*—preposition—variously translated to, at, for, by, in, with,
towards.\
 *A cappella*—in church style.\
 *A capriccio*—at the fancy of the performer.\
 *À deux mains*—for two hands.\
 *A mezza voce*—with half voice.\

*À la*, or *alla*—in the manner of. *Alla marcia*—in the style of a
march.

*Assai*—very, or very much. *Allegro assai*—very fast.

*Ben*—well. *Ben marcato*—well marked.

*Coi, con, col, colla, colle, collo*—with, or with the.\
 *Con amore*—with tenderness.\
 *Colla voce*—with the voice.\

*Come*—as, like. *Come primo*—as at first.

*Contra*—against. In compound words means "an octave below."

*Da*—from. *Da Capo*—from the head.

*Di*—by, with, of, for. *Di bravura*—with daring.

*Di molto*—exceedingly—very much. *Allegro di molto*—exceedingly rapid.

*Doppio*—double. *Doppio movimento*—double movement.

*E, ed, et*—and. *Cresc. et accel.*—louder and faster.

*Ensemble*—together, the opposite of solo.

*Il, La, l', le*—the. *Il basso*—the bass. *L'istesso tempo*—the same
speed.

*Il più*—the most. *Il più forte possible*—as loudly as possible.

*Issimo*—Italian superlative ending. *Forte*—*fortissimo*.

*Ino, etto*—Italian diminutive endings. *Andante*—*andantino*.
*Poco*—*pochetto*.

*Meno*—less. *Meno forte*—less loud.

*Mente*—the ending which changes a noun or adjective to an adverb.
*Largo largamente*.

*Mezzo* or *mezza*—half, or medium. *Mezzo forte*—medium loud.

*Molto*—much, or very much. *Molto cresc.*—very much louder.

*Nel, nella, etc.*—in the, or at the. *Nel battere*—at the down beat.

*Non*—not. *Non tanto*—not too much.

*Ossia*—or else. *Ossia più facile*—or else more easily.

*Per*—for. *Per il violino*—for the violin.

*Peu*—little. *Un peu cresc.*—a little increase in tone.

*Più*—more. *Più forte*—more loudly.[Pg 43]

*Poco*—little. *Poco a poco*—little by little.

*Poi*—then. *E poi la coda*—and then the coda.

*Possibile*—possible. *Forte possibile*—as loudly as possible.

*Quasi*—in the manner of. *Allegro quasi andante*—a fairly rapid
movement, yet in the style of an andante; almost as slow as an andante.

*Sans*—without. *Sans pedales*—without pedals.

*Sempre*—always, or continually. *Sempre forte*—a long passage to be
played forte throughout its entirety.

*Senza*—without. *Senza accompagnamento*—without accompaniment.

*Sino, sin*—as far as. See [p. 14](#Page_14), note.

*Solo*—alone. Opposite of ensemble.

*Sub*—under or lower. *Sub-dominant*—the under dominant.

*Tanto*—same as *troppo*, q.v.

*Tre*—three. *Tre corde*—three strings.

*Très*—very. *Très vivement*—very lively.

*Troppo*—too much. *Non tanto allegro*, or *non troppo allegro*—not too
fast.

*Una, un, uno*—one, or a. *Una corda*—one string. *Un peu*—a little.

A working knowledge of these auxiliary terms will aid the student
greatly in arriving at the meaning of hundreds of terms without stopping
to look up each individual one.

* * * * *

[Pg 44]

CHAPTER X
---------

Measure
-------

​97. From the standpoint of the eye, a *measure* is that portion of the
staff found between two bars, (in certain cases this space may be less
than a measure, as *e.g.*, at the beginning and end of a movement); but
from the standpoint of the ear a single, isolated measure is not
possible, and the term must therefore be defined in the plural form.

*Measures* are similarly accented groups of evenly-spaced beats, each
group having at least one accented and one non-accented beat. The
strongest accent falls normally on the first beat in the measure.

Two essential characteristics are involved in the ordinary musical
measure:

​(1) A group of even beats (or pulses), always felt, though not always
actually sounded, one or more of these beats being stronger than the
rest;

​(2) Certain rhythmic figures (![rhythmic
figure](images/rhythm.jpg "rhythmic figure") etc.) which form the actual
musical content of these groups.

The student will note the essential difference between rhythm and
measure. Rhythm is the regular recurrence of accent in a series of beats
(or pulses), while measure is the grouping of these beats according to
some specified system. In listening to a piece of music, two hearers A
and B may feel the *rhythm* equally strongly, but A may subjectively
group the beats into—*one*, two | *one*, two |—etc., while B feels the
groups as—*one*, two, *three*, four | *one*, two, *three*, four |—etc.
Rhythm is thus seen to be a fundamental thing, inherent in the music
itself, while measure is to a certain extent at least an arbitrary
grouping which musicians have adopted for practical purposes.

​98. In *syncopation* the normal system of accenting is temporarily
suspended and the accented tone falls on the regularly unaccented part
of the measure. Syncopation may therefore be defined as the temporary
interruption of a normal[Pg 45] series of accents, *i.e.*, accenting a
beat that is usually not accented. Thus *e.g.*, in Fig. 56, measure
*one* has the regular system of accents normally found in
four-quarter-measure, (strong accent on one, secondary accent on three);
but measure *three* has only one accent, and it falls on the second
beat.

 

![Fig. 56](images/fig56.jpg "Fig. 56")

[[Listen]](music/fig56.mid)

 

​99. Measures are usually classified as *simple* and *compound*. A
*simple measure* is one which has but a single accent, *i.e.*, the
measure cannot be divided into smaller constituent groups. There are two
main classes of simple measures, two-beat measure, and three-beat
measure. A *compound measure* is (as its name implies) one made up by
combining two or more simple measures, or by the elaboration of a single
measure (in slow tempo) into several constituent groups. The principal
compound measures are four-beat and six-beat, both being referred to as
compound-duple measures. Five-beat, seven-beat, nine-beat, and
twelve-beat measures are also classified as compound measures.

An English writer[[23]](#Footnote_23_23) classifies measures as duple,
triple, or quadruple, specifying that a simple measure is one in which
each beat is represented by a note whose value can be divided into
halves (![simple measure](images/simpmeas.jpg "simple measure") etc.)
and that a compound measure is one in which each beat is represented by
a dotted-note, whose value can be divided into three parts, (![compound
measure](images/compmeas.jpg "compound measure")). There is thus seen to
be considerable difference of opinion as to the meaning of the words
*simple* and *compound* when applied in this connection, the principal
question at issue being whether four-beat measure is an individual
variety, or whether it is a variety compounded out of two-beat measures,
either by placing two of these in a group or by the elaboration of a
single measure into a larger number of beats, as is often necessary in
slow tempi. Perhaps the easiest way out of the difficulty is to admit
that both may be true—but in different compositions. That is, it is
frequently impossible to tell whether a composition that is being
listened to is in two-beat, or in four-beat measure; and yet it *is*
sometimes possible so to discriminate. Since, however, one cannot in the
majority of cases distinguish between two-beat and four-beat measures,
it will probably be best to leave the original classification intact and
regard four-beat measure as a compound variety.

[Pg 46]

​100. The *commonest varieties of measure* are:

​1. *Duple* (sometimes called even measure, or even time), in which
there are two beats, the first one being accented. Examples of duple
measure are 2/4, 2/8, 2/2, two-quarter,[[24]](#Footnote_24_24)
two-eighth, and two-half measure, respectively.

​2. *Triple*, (the old perfect measure), in which there are three beats,
the first one being accented, the second and third unaccented. Examples
are 3/8, 3/4, 3/2, three-eighth, three-quarter, and three-half measure,
respectively.

​3. *Quadruple*, in which there are four beats, the first and third
being accented (primary accent on *one*, secondary accent on *three*),
the second and fourth unaccented. (See note above, under [Sec.
99](#SEC_99).)

​4. *Sextuple*, in which there are six beats, the first and fourth being
accented, the others not. In rapid tempi this is always taken as
compound duple measure, a dotted quarter note having a beat. It will be
noted that the two measures ![sextuple](images/sextuple.jpg "sextuple")
are identical in effect with
![sextuple](images/sextuple2.jpg "sextuple").

​101. Other varieties of measure sometimes found are 9/8 and 12/8, but
these are practically always taken as three-beat and four-beat measures
respectively, being equivalent to these if each group of three tones is
thought of as a triplet. ![9/8 bar](images/98bar.jpg "9/8 bar") is
identical in effect with ![3/4 bar](images/34bar.jpg "3/4 bar").

​102. *Quintuple* (five-beat) and *septuple* (seven-beat) measures are
occasionally met with, but these are rare and will always be sporadic.
The five-beat measure is taken as a combination of three and two, or of
two and three (sometimes a mixture of both in the same composition),
while the[Pg 47] seven-beat measure is taken in groups of four and
three, or of three and four.

​103. The sign ![common time](images/common.jpg "common time") is
usually understood to mean four-quarter measure, and the sign
![cut-time](images/cuttime.jpg "cut-time"), two-half measure, but usage
varies somewhat, and the second sign is sometimes used to indicate
four-half measure. It may safely be said however that the sign
![cut-time](images/cuttime.jpg "cut-time") always indicates that a
half-note has a beat.
![cut-time](images/cuttime.jpg "cut-time")![cut-time](images/cuttime.jpg "cut-time")
may occasionally be found indicating four-half measure but this is rare.

The student will note that the sign ![common
time](images/common.jpg "common time") is not a *letter* C, but an
incomplete circle, differentiating two-beat (imperfect) measure from
three-beat (perfect) measure. See [Appendix A](#APPENDIX_A), p.
[106](#Page_106).

* * * * *

[Pg 48]

CHAPTER XI
----------

Tempo
-----

​104. The word *time* in musical nomenclature has been greatly abused,
having been used to indicate:

​(1) Rhythm; as "the time was wrong."

​(2) Variety of measure-signature; as "two-four time."

​(3) Rate of speed; as "the time was too slow."

To obviate the confusion naturally resulting from this three-fold and
inexact use of the word, many teachers of music are adopting certain
*changes in terminology* as noted in Sections [105](#SEC_105),
[106](#SEC_106), and [107](#SEC_107). Such changes may cause some
confusion at first, but seem to be necessary if our musical terminology
is to be at all exact.

​105. The *first of the changes* mentioned in the above paragraph is to
substitute the word *rhythm* for the word *time* when correcting
mistakes involving misplaced accent, etc. *E.g.*, "Your *rhythm* in the
third measure of the lower score was wrong," instead of "Your *time*—was
wrong."

​106. The *second change* mentioned would eliminate such blind and
misleading expressions as "two-four time," "three-four time," "four-four
time," "six-eight time," etc., and substitute therefor such
self-explanatory designations as "two-quarter measure," "three-quarter
measure," "four-quarter measure," "six-eighth measure," etc. *E.g.*,
"The first movement of the Beethoven Sonata Op. 2, No. 3, is in
*four-quarter measure*."

​107. The *third change* referred to above would substitute the word
*tempo* (plural—*tempi*) for the word *time* in all allusions to rate of
speed. *E.g.*, "The scherzo was played in very rapid *tempo*."[Pg 49]

The word *tempo* has been used in this connection so long by
professional musicians that there can be no possible objection to it on
the ground of its being a foreign word. In fact there is a decided
advantage in having a word that is understood in all countries where
modern music (*i.e.*, civilized music) is performed, and just here is
found the principal reason for the popularity of the Italian language in
musical terminology. Schumann, MacDowell and other well known composers
have tried to break down this popularity by using their own respective
vernaculars in both tempo and dynamic indications, but in spite of these
attempts the Italian language is still quite universally used for this
purpose, and deservedly so, for if we are to have a *music notation*
that is universal, so that an American is able to play music written by
a Frenchman or a German, or a Russian, then we ought also to have a
certain number of expressions referring to tempo, etc., which will be
understood by all, *i.e.*, a music terminology that is universal. The
Italian language was the first in the field, is the most universally
known in this particular at the present time, and is entirely adequate.
It should therefore be retained in use as a sort of musical Esperanto.

​108. There are several *ways of finding the correct tempo* of a
composition:

​1. From the metronomic indication found at the beginning of many
compositions. Thus *e.g.*, the mark M.M. 92 (Maelzel's Metronome 92)
means that if the metronome (either Maelzel's or some other reliable
make) is set with the sliding weight at the figure 92 there will be 92
clicks per minute, and they will serve to indicate to the player or
singer the rate at which the beats (or pulses) should follow one
another. This is undoubtedly the most accurate means of determining
tempi in spite of slight inaccuracies in
metronomes[[25]](#Footnote_25_25) and of the mistakes which composers
themselves often make in giving metronomic indications.

​2. Another means of determining the tempo of a composition is to play
it at different tempi and then to choose the one that "feels right" for
that particular piece of music. This is perhaps the best means of
getting at the correct tempo but is open only to the[Pg 50] musician of
long experience, sure judgment, and sound scholarship.

​3. A third method of finding tempi is through the interpretation of
certain words used quite universally by composers to indicate the
approximate rate of speed and the general mood of compositions. The
difficulty with this method is that one can hardly find two composers
who employ the same word to indicate the same tempo, so that no absolute
rate of speed can be indicated, and in the last analysis the conductor
or performer must fall back on the second method cited above—*i.e.*,
individual judgment.

​109. In spite of the inexactness of use in the case of expressions
relating to tempo, these expressions are nevertheless extremely useful
in giving at least a hint of what was in the composer's mind as he
conceived the music that we are trying to interpret. Since a number of
the terms overlap in meaning, and since the meaning of no single term is
absolute, these expressions relating to tempo are best studied in
groups. Perhaps the most convenient grouping is as follows:

​1. *Grave* (lit. weighty, serious), *larghissimo*, *adagissimo*, and
*lentissimo*—indicating the very slowest tempo used in rendering music.

​2. *Largo*,[[26]](#Footnote_26_26) *adagio*,[[27]](#Footnote_27_27) and
*lento*—indicating quite a slow tempo.

​3. *Larghetto* (*i.e.*, *a little largo*) and *adagietto* (*a little
adagio*)—a slow tempo, but not quite so slow as *largo*, etc.

​4. *Andante* (going, or walking, as contrasted with running) and
*andantino*—indicating a moderately slow tempo.[Pg 51]

*Andantino* is now quite universally taken slightly faster than
*andante*, in spite of the fact that if *andante* means "going," and if
"*ino*" is the diminutive ending, then *andantino* means "going less,"
*i.e.*, more slowly!

​5. *Moderato*—a moderate tempo.

​6. *Allegro* and *allegretto*[[28]](#Footnote_28_28)—a moderately quick
tempo, *allegretto* being usually interpreted as meaning a tempo
somewhat slower than *allegro*.

The word *allegro* means literally happy, joyous, and this literal
meaning is still *sometimes* applicable, but in the majority of
instances the term refers only to rate of speed.

​7. *Vivo*, *vivace*, (lit. lively)—a tempo between *allegro* and
*presto*.

​8. *Presto*, *prestissimo*, *vivacissimo*, and *prestissimo
possibile*—the most rapid tempo possible.

* * * * *

[Pg 52]

CHAPTER XII
-----------

Tempo (*Continued*)
-------------------

​110. Innumerable combinations of the words defined in [Sec.
109](#SEC_109) with one another and with other words occur. Some of
these combinations with their approximate meanings follow. The meaning
of any such expression not found in the list may usually be arrived at
by consulting the terms defined in [paragraph 109](#SEC_109) and
recalling the use of certain auxiliary terms quoted in [Chapter
IX](#CHAPTER_IX).

*Largo assai*—very slow.

*Largo di molto*—very slow.

*Largo ma non troppo*—slow, but not too slow.

*Largo un poco*—slow, but not so slow as *largo*. (*Cf. larghetto*.)

*Lentemente*—slowly.

*Lentando*—with increasing slowness.

*Très lentement*—very slowly.

*Lentissamente*—very slowly.

*Lentissamamente*—very slowly.

*Lento assai*—very slowly.

*Lento a capriccio*—slowly but capriciously.

*Lento di molto*—very slowly.

*Andante* *affettuoso*—moderately slow, and with tenderness and pathos.

*Andante amabile*—moderately slow, and lovingly.

*Andante cantabile*—moderately slow, and in singing style.

*Andante grazioso*—moderately slow, and gracefully.

*Andante maestoso*—moderately slow, and majestically.

*Andante con moto*—slightly faster than *andante*.

*Andante (ma) non troppo*—not too slowly.

*Andante pastorale*—moderately slow, and in simple and unaffected style;
(lit. rural, pastoral).

*Andante quasi allegro*—almost as rapid in tempo as *allegro*; (lit. an
*andante* in the style of *allegro*).

*Andante sostenuto*—moderately slow and sustained.

*Allegrissimo*—much faster than *allegro*. (The superlative degree of
*allegro*.)

*Allegro agitato*—a moderately rapid tempo, and in agitated style.

*Allegro appassionata*—a moderately rapid tempo, and in passionate
style.

*Allegro assai* (very *allegro*)—faster than *allegro*.

*Allegro commodo*—a conveniently rapid tempo.

*Allegro con brio*—an *allegro* played in brilliant style. Faster than
*allegro*.[Pg 53]

*Allegro con fuoco*—an *allegro* played with fire, *i.e.*, with extreme
animation. Faster than *allegro*.

*Allegro con spirito*—an *allegro* performed with spirit.

*Allegro con moto*—faster than *allegro*.

*Allegro di bravura*—an *allegro* performed in brilliant style, *i.e.*,
demanding great skill in execution.

*Allegro furioso* (furiously)—quicker than *allegro*; very brilliant.

*Allegro giusto*—an *allegro* movement, but in exact rhythm.

*Allegro ma grazioso*—an *allegro* played in graceful style.

*Allegro (ma) non tanto*—an *allegro* movement, but not too rapid.

*Allegro (ma) non troppo*—an *allegro* movement, but not too rapid.

*Allegro (ma) non presto*—an *allegro* movement, but not too rapid.

*Allegro moderato*—slower than *allegro*.

*Allegro vivace*—faster than *allegro*.

*Presto assai*—as rapidly as possible.

*Presto (ma) non troppo*—a *presto* movement, but not too rapid.

​111. There are certain *terms which indicate a modification of the
normal tempo* of a movement, these being divided into two classes, (a)
those terms which indicate in general a slower tempo, and (b) those
which indicate in general a more rapid tempo. The further subdivisions
of these two classes are shown below.

(*a*) Terms indicating a slower tempo.

​1. Terms indicating a *gradual* retard.

*Ritenente*, (*rit.*), *ritenuto* (*rit.*), *ritardando* (*rit.*),
*rallentando* (*rall.*), *slentando*.

​2. Terms indicating a tempo which is to become definitely slower *at
once*.

*Più lento* (lit. more slowly), *meno mosso* (lit. less movement).

​3. Terms indicating a slower tempo combined with an increase in power.

*Largando*, *allargando.* These words are both derived from *largo*,
meaning large, broad.

(For terms indicating both slower tempo and softer tone, see [page
59](#Page_59), [Sec. 127](#SEC_127).)

The student should note the difference between groups 1 and 2 as given
above: the terms in group 1 indicate that each measure, and even each
pulse in the measure, is a little slower than the preceding one, while
such terms as *più lento* and *meno mosso*[Pg 54] indicate a rate of
speed becoming instantly slower and extending over an entire phrase or
passage. Some composers (*e.g.*, Beethoven and Couperin) have evidently
had this same distinction in mind between *rallentando* and *ritardando*
on the one hand, and *ritenuto* and *ritenente* on the other,
considering the former (*rall.* and *rit.*) to indicate a gradually
slackening speed, and the latter (*ritenuto* and *ritenente*) to
indicate a definitely slower rate. The majority of composers do not
however differentiate between them in this way, and it will therefore
hardly be worth while for the student to try to remember the
distinction.

(*b*) Terms indicating a more rapid tempo.

​1. Terms indicating a gradual acceleration.

*Accelerando*, *affrettando* (this term implies some degree of
excitement also), *stringendo*, *poco a poco animato*.

​2. Terms indicating a tempo which is to become definitely faster at
once.

*Più allegro*, *più tosto*, *più mosso*, *stretto*, *un poco animato*.

​112. After any modification in tempo (either faster or slower) has been
suggested it is usual to indicate a return to the normal rate by some
such expression as *a tempo* (lit. in time), *a tempo primo* (lit. in
the first time), *tempo primo*, or *tempo*.

​113. *Tempo rubato* (or *a tempo rubato*) means literally *in robbed
time*, *i.e.*, duration taken from one measure or beat and given to
another, but in modern practice the term is quite generally applied to
any irregularity of rhythm or tempo not definitely indicated in the
score.

The terms *ad libitum*, (*ad lib.*), *a piacere*, and *a capriccio*,
also indicate a modification of the tempo at the will of the performer.
*Ad libitum* means at liberty; *a piacere*, at pleasure; and *a
capriccio*, at the caprice (of the performer).

​114. The term *tempo giusto* is the opposite of *tempo rubato* (and of
the other terms defined in paragraph 113). It means literally *in exact
time*. (*Tempo giusto* is sometimes translated *quite
rapidly*,[[29]](#Footnote_29_29) but this is very unusual.)

[Pg 55]

​115. *L'istesso tempo* means—at the same rate of speed. *E.g.*, when a
measure signature changes from 2/4 to 6/8 with a change in beat-note
from a quarter to a dotted-quarter, but with the same tempo carried
through the entire movement.

​116. *Tenuto* (*ten.*) indicates that a tone or chord is to be held to
its full value. This word is sometimes used after a staccato passage to
show that the staccato effect is to be discontinued, but is often used
merely as a warning not to slight a melody-tone—*i.e.*, to give it its
full value.

​117. *Veloce* means—swiftly, and is applied to brilliant passages
(*e.g.*, cadenzas) which are to be played as rapidly as possible without
much regard for measure rhythm. The words *rapidamente*, *brillante* and
*volante* (flying) have the same meaning as *veloce*.

​118. The following *expressions referring to tempo* are also in common
use but cannot easily be classified with any of the groups already
defined.

*Con moto*—with motion; *i.e.*, not too slow.

*Pesante*—slowly, heavily.

*Doppio movimento*—twice as rapid as before.

*Tempo ordinario*—in ordinary tempo.

*Tempo commodo*—in convenient tempo.

*Sempre lento malinconico assai*—always slowly and in a very melancholy
style.

*Animando*, *animato*, *con anima*—with animation.

*Agitato*—agitated.

​119. *Tempo di marcia* is given by Riemann (Dictionary of Music, p.
783) as equivalent to *andante*, M.M. 72-84. The same writer gives
*tempo di menuetto* as equivalent to *allegretto*, and *tempo di valso*
as equivalent to *allegro moderato* (which he regards as indicating a
more rapid tempo than *allegretto*).

* * * * *

[Pg 56]

CHAPTER XIII
------------

Dynamics
--------

​120. The word *dynamics* (cf. dynamic—the opposite of static) as used
in the nomenclature of music has to do with the various degrees of power
(*i.e.*, the comparative loudness and softness) of tones.

As in the case of words referring to tempo, the expressions referring to
*dynamics* are always relative, never absolute; it is possible to
indicate that one measure is to be louder than another, but it is not
possible (nor desirable) to indicate exactly how loud either is to be.
Thus *dynamics*, perhaps even more than tempo, will be seen to depend on
the taste of the performer or conductor.

The following *words referring to dynamics* are in common use:

*Pianisissimo* (*ppp*)—as softly as possible. (It will be noted that
this is a sort of hyper-superlative of *piano*.)

*Pianissimo* (*pp*)—very softly. (The superlative of *piano*.)

*Piano* (*p*)—softly.

*Mezzo piano* (*mp*)—medium softly.

*Mezzo forte* (*mf*)—medium loudly.

*Forte* (*f*)—loudly (lit. strong).

*Fortissimo* (*ff*)—very loudly. (The superlative of *forte*.)

*Fortisissimo* (*fff*)—as loudly as possible.

The lack of a one-word comparative degree in the case of both *piano*
and *forte* seems to necessitate the hyper-superlative degree as given
above, but the practice of using four, or even five *p*'s or *f*'s is
not desirable.

​121. The terms defined in [Sec. 120](#SEC_120) are often combined with
others, as *e.g.*,

*Pianissimo possibile*—as softly as possible.

*Piano assai*—very softly.

*Fortissimo possibile*—as loudly as possible.

*Forte piano* (*fp*)—loud, followed at once by soft.

[Pg 57]

As in the case of terms relating to tempo, the meaning of many other
expressions relating to *dynamics* may easily be arrived at by recalling
the list of auxiliary terms quoted under [Sec. 96](#SEC_96).

​122. The terms *sforzando*, *forzando*, *sforzato* and *forzato* all
indicate a strong accent on a single tone or chord. These words are
abbreviated as follows:—*sf*,*fz*, and *sfz*, the abbreviation being
placed directly above (sometimes below) the note or chord affected. The
signs ![vertical accent](images/vaccent.jpg "vertical accent") and
![horizontal accent](images/haccent.jpg "horizontal accent") are also
commonly used to indicate such an accent.

In interpreting these accent marks the student must bear in mind again
the fact that they have a relative rather than an absolute meaning: the
mark *sf* occurring in the midst of a *piano* passage will indicate a
much milder form of accent than would the same mark occurring in the
midst of a *forte* passage.

​123. The words *rinforzando* and *rinforzato* (abb.—*rinf.* and *rfz.*)
mean literally *reinforced*, and are used to indicate a sudden increase
in power usually extending over an entire phrase or passage instead of
applying only to a single tone or chord as in the case of *sforzando*,
etc.

​124. *Crescendo* (abb.—*cresc.* or
![crescendo](images/crescendo.jpg "crescendo")) means a gradual increase
in power. It will be noted that this word does not mean *loud*, nor does
it mean a sudden increase in power unless accompanied by some auxiliary
term such as *subito*, or *molto*.

Broadly speaking there are *two varieties of crescendo*: (1) that in
which the same tone increases in power while being prolonged; (2) that
in which succeeding tones are each sounded more strongly than the
preceding one. The first variety is possible only on instruments giving
forth a tone which can be varied *after it begins*. Thus *e.g.*, the
human voice, the violin, the organ enclosed in a swell box, and certain
wind instruments, are all capable of sounding a tone softly at first and
gradually increasing the volume until the maximal point of power has
been reached. But on the piano, organ not enclosed in a swell-box,
kettle drum, etc., the power of the[Pg 58] tone cannot be varied after
the tone has once been sounded, and a *crescendo* effect is therefore
possible only in a *passage*, in rendering which each succeeding tone is
struck more forcibly than its immediate predecessor. This second variety
of *crescendo* offers a means of dramatic effect which may be employed
most strikingly, as *e.g.*, when a long passage begins very softly and
increases in power little by little until the utmost resources of the
instrument or orchestra have been reached. A notable example of such an
effect is found in the transition from the third to the fourth movements
of the Beethoven Fifth Symphony.

The difference between *sforzando*, *rinforzando*, and *crescendo*
should now be noted: *sforzando* indicates that a single tone or chord
is to be louder; *rinforzando*, that an entire passage is to be louder,
beginning with its first tone; but *crescendo* indicates that there is
to be a gradual increase in power, this increase sometimes occurring
during the sounding of a single tone, but more often in a passage.

​125. Certain *combinations of the word crescendo* with other words are
so common that they should be especially noted. Among these are:

*Crescendo al fortissimo*—keep on gradually increasing in power until
the fortissimo (or very loud) point has been reached.

*Crescendo subito*—increase in power suddenly (or rapidly).

*Crescendo poco a poco*—increase in power very, very gradually.

*Crescendo poi diminuendo*—first increase, then diminish the tone.

*Crescendo e diminuendo*—same as *cresc. poi dim.*

*Crescendo molto*—increase in power very greatly.

*Crescendo ed animando poco a poco*—growing gradually louder in tone and
quicker in *tempo*.

*Crescendo ed* *affrettando*—gradually louder and faster.

*Crescendo poco a poco sin al fine*—crescendo gradually even up to the
very end.

​126. *Decrescendo* (*decresc.* or
![decrescendo](images/decrescendo.jpg "decrescendo")) means a gradual
diminishing of the tone. It is the opposite of *crescendo*. The word
*diminuendo* is synonymous with *decrescendo*.

*Decrescendo* (or *diminuendo*) *al pianissimo* means—decrease gradually
in power until the *pianissimo* (or very soft) point is reached.[Pg 59]

​127. A number of *terms referring to both softer tone and slower tempo*
are in use. The most common of these are:—*mancando*,
*moriente*,[[30]](#Footnote_30_30) *morendo*, *perdendo* (from
*perdere*—to lose), *perdendosi*, *calando*, and
*smorzando*.[[31]](#Footnote_31_31) Such expressions are usually
translated—"gradually dying away."

​128. In piano music the abbreviation *Ped.* indicates that the damper
pedal (the one at the right) is to be depressed, while the sign ![damper
release](images/damper1.jpg "damper release") shows that it is to be
released. In many modern editions this depression and release of the
damper pedal are more accurately indicated by the sign
![damper](images/damper2.jpg "damper").

The term *senza sordini* is also occasionally found in old editions,
indicating that the damper pedal is to be depressed, while *con sordini*
shows that it is to be released. These expressions are taken from a
usage in music for stringed instruments, in which the term *con sordini*
means that the mute (a small clamp of metal, ivory or hardwood) is to be
affixed to the bridge, this causing a modification in both power and
quality of the tone. The damper on the piano does not in any way
correspond to the mute thus used on stringed instruments, and the terms
above explained as sometimes occurring in piano music are not to be
recommended, even though Beethoven used them in this sense in all his
earlier sonatas.

​129. The words *una corda* (lit.—one string) indicate that the "soft
pedal" (the one at the left) is to be depressed, while the words *tre
corde* (lit. three strings) or *tutte le corde* (all the strings) show
that the same pedal is to be released. These expressions refer to the
fact that on grand pianos the "soft pedal" when depressed moves the
hammers to one side so that instead of striking three strings they
strike only two (in the older pianos only one, hence *una corda*), all
three strings (*tre corde*) being struck again after the release of the
pedal.

​130. Other terms relating either directly or indirectly to the subject
of dynamics are:

*Con alcuna licenza*—with some degree of license.

*Con amore*—with tenderness.

*Con bravura*—with boldness.

*Con celerita*—with rapidity.

*Con delicato*—with delicacy.

*Con energico*—with energy.

*Con espressione*—with expression.[Pg 60]

*Con forza*—with force.

*Con fuoco*—with fire and passion.

*Con grand' espressione*—with great expression.

*Con grazia*—with grace.

*Con melinconia*—with melancholy.

*Con passione*—with passion.

*Con spirito*—with spirit.

*Con tenerezza*—with tenderness.

*Delicato*—delicately.

*Dolce*—sweetly, gently.

*Dolcissimo*—most sweetly.

*Dolce e cantabile*—gently and with singing tone.

*Dolente*   }\
 *Doloroso* } plaintively or sorrowfully.

*Espressivo*—expressively.

*Grandioso*—grandly, pompously.

*Grazioso*—gracefully.

*Giocoso*—humorously, (cf. jocose).

*Giojoso*—joyfully, (cf. joyous).

*Lacrimando*, *lacrimoso*—sorrowfully.

*Legato*—smoothly.

*Leggiero*—lightly.

*Leggierissimo*—most lightly; almost a staccato.

*Lusingando*—caressingly, coaxingly, tenderly.

*Maesta*, *maestoso*—majestically.

*Martellando*, *martellato*—strongly accented, (lit.—hammered).

*Marziale*—martial—war-like.

*Mesto*—pensively.

*Mezzo voce*—with half voice.

*Misterioso*—mysteriously.

*Parlando*—well accented or enunciated; applied to melody playing. (The
word parlando means literally-speaking.)

*Pastorale*—in simple and unaffected style, (lit.—pastoral, rural).

*Pomposo*—pompously.

*Precipitoso*—precipitously.

*Recitativo*—well enunciated. (This meaning applies only in instrumental
music in which a melody is to stand out above the accompaniment. For
def. of recitative in vocal music, see [p. 78](#Page_78).)

*Risoluto*—firmly, resolutely.

*Scherzando*, *scherzoso*, etc.—jokingly. These terms are derived from
the word *scherzo* meaning *a musical joke*.

*Semplice*—simply.

*Sempre marcatissimo*—always well marked, *i.e.*, strongly accented.

*Sentimento*—with sentiment.

*Solenne*—solemn.

*Sotto voce*—in subdued voice.

*Spiritoso*—with spirit.[Pg 61]

*Strepitoso*—precipitously.

*Tranquillo*—tranquilly.

*Tristamente*—sadly.

​131. Many other terms are encountered which on their face sometimes
seem to be quite formidable, but which yield readily to analysis. Thus
*e.g.*, *crescendo poco a poco al forte ed un pochettino accelerando*,
is seen to mean merely—"increase gradually to *forte* and accelerate a
very little bit." A liberal application of common sense will aid greatly
in the interpretation of such expressions.

* * * * *

[Pg 62]

CHAPTER XIV
-----------

Terms Relating to Forms and Styles
----------------------------------

​132. A *form* in music is a specific arrangement of the various parts
of a composition resulting in a structure so characteristic that it is
easily recognized by the ear. Thus *e.g.*, although every fugue is
different from all other fugues in actual material, yet the arrangement
of the various parts is so characteristic that no one who knows the
*fugue form* has any doubt as to what kind of a composition he is
hearing whenever a fugue is played. The word *form* is therefore seen to
be somewhat synonymous with the word *plan* as used in architecture; it
is the structure or design underlying music. Examples of form are the
canon, the fugue, the sonata, etc.

Speaking broadly we may say that *form* in any art consists in the
placing together of certain parts in such relations of proportion and
symmetry as to make a unified whole. In music this implies unity of
tonality and of general rhythmic effect, as well as unity in the
grouping of the various parts of the work (phrases, periods, movements)
so as to weld them into one whole, giving the impression of completeness
to the hearer.

​133. The primal *basis of form* is the repetition of some
characteristic effect, and the problem of the composer is to bring about
these repetitions in such a way that the ear will recognize them as
being the same material and will nevertheless not grow weary of them.
This is accomplished by varying the material (cf. thematic development),
by introducing contrasting material, and by choice of key.

​134. The student should note at the outset of this topic the
*difference in meaning between* the terms *form* and *style*:[Pg 63] A
*form* is a plan for building a certain definite kind of composition,
but a *style* is merely a manner of writing. Thus *e.g.*, the *fugue* is
a *form*—*i.e.*, it is a plan, which although capable of variation in
details, is yet carried out fairly definitely in every case; but
*counterpoint* is merely a *style* or manner of writing (just as Gothic
architecture is a style of building), which may be cast into any one of
several *forms*.

​135. The material found in the following sections is an attempt to
explain in simple language certain terms relating to *forms* and
*styles* which are in common use; in many cases the definition is too
meagre to give anything but a very general idea, but it is hoped that
the student will at least be set to thinking and that he will eventually
be led to a more detailed and scholarly study of the subject. (The
article "Form" and the separate articles under each term here defined,
as found in Grove's Dictionary, are especially recommended. For examples
of the various forms described, see also Mason and Surette—"The
Appreciation of Music," Supplementary Volume.)

​136. In a very general way there may be said to be *two styles of
musical composition*, the monophonic (or homophonic)—the one-voiced—and
the polyphonic—the many voiced. The polyphonic[[32]](#Footnote_32_32)
style antedates the monophonic historically.

​137. In *monophonic music* there is one voice which has a pronounced
melody, the other voices (if present) supporting this melody as a
harmonic (and often rhythmic) background. An example of this is the
ordinary hymn-tune with its melody in the highest part, and with three
other voices forming a "four-part harmony." The sonata, symphony, opera,
modern piano piece, etc., are also largely *monophonic*, though
polyphonic passages by way of contrast are often to be found.[Pg 64]

​138. In *polyphonic music* each voice is to a certain extent
melodically interesting, and the "harmony" is the result of combining
several melodies in such a way as to give a pleasing effect, instead of
treating a melody by adding chords as an accompaniment or support.
Counterpoint, canon, round, fugue, etc., are all *polyphonic* in style.
The word *contrapuntal* is often used synonymously with *polyphonic*.

(Sections [139](#SEC_139) to [143](#SEC_143) relate especially to terms
describing polyphonic music.)

​139. *Counterpoint* is the art of adding one or more parts or melodies
to a given melody, the latter being known as the "cantus firmus," or
subject. It may therefore be broadly defined as "the art of combining
melodies."

The word *counterpoint* comes from the three words "*punctus contra
punctum*," meaning "point against point." The word point as here used
refers to the *punctus*—one of the neumae of the mediaeval system, these
neumae being the immediate predecessors of modern notes.

Both vocal and instrumental music have been written in contrapuntal
style. The familiar two- and three-part "inventions" by Bach are
excellent examples of instrumental counterpoint, while such choruses as
those in "The Messiah" by Handel illustrate the highest type of vocal
counterpoint.

​140. *Imitation* is the repetition by one part, of a subject or theme
previously introduced by another part. If the imitation is exact, the
term *strict imitation* is applied, but if only approximate, then the
term *free imitation* is used in referring to it. The repetition need
not have the exact pitches of the subject in order to be *strict*; on
the contrary the imitation is usually at the interval of an octave, or a
fifth, or a second, etc. Fig. 57 shows an example of strict imitation in
which the *third* part comes in an octave *lower* than the first part.

​141. A *canon* is a contrapuntal composition in the style of strict
imitation, one part repeating exactly (but at any interval) what another
part has played or sung. The term "canonic style" is sometimes applied
to music in which the imitation is not exact. An example of three-part
canon is given in Fig. 57.[Pg 65]

 

**CANON IN THREE VOICES, IN THE UNISON AND OCTAVE**

![Fig. 57. Mozart Canon](images/fig57.jpg "Fig. 57. Mozart Canon")

[[Listen]](music/fig57.mid)

 

The word *canon* means *law*, and was applied to this particular form of
composition because the rules relating to its composition were
invariable. It is because of this non-flexibility that the *canon* is so
little used as a form at the present time: the modern composer demands a
plan of writing that is capable of being varied to such an extent as to
give him room for the exercise of his own particular individuality of
conception, and this the *canon* does not do. For this same reason too
the fugue and the sonata have successively gone out of fashion and from
Schumann down to the present time composers have as it were created
their own forms, the difficulty in listening arising from the fact that
no one but the composer himself could recognize the form *as* a form[Pg
66] because it had not been adopted to a great enough extent by other
composers to make it in any sense universal. The result is that in much
present-day music it is very difficult for the hearer to discover any
trace of familiar design, and the impression made by such music is in
consequence much less definite than that made by music of the classic
school. It is probable that a reaction from this state of affairs will
come in the near future, for in any art it is necessary that there
should be at least enough semblance of structure to make the art work
capable of standing as a universal thing rather than as the mere
temporary expression of some particular composer or of some period of
composition.

​142. The common *school round* is an example of canon, each voice
repeating exactly what the first voice has sung, while this first voice
is going on with its melody. The *round* is therefore defined as a
variety of canon in which the imitation is always in unison with the
subject.

​143. The *fugue* (Latin, *fuga* = flight) is a form of contrapuntal
composition in which the imitation is always in the dominant key,
*i.e.*, a fifth above or a fourth below. The imitation (called "the
answer") may be an exact repetition of the subject (sometimes called
"the question"), but is usually not so.

The *fugue* differs from the canon also in that the subject is given in
complete form before the answer begins, while in the canon the imitation
begins while the subject is still going on. The *fugue* is not nearly so
strict in form as the canon and gives the composer much greater
opportunity for expressing musical ideas. A canon may be perfect in
*form* and yet be very poor music; this same statement might of course
be made about any form, but is especially true in the stricter ones.

* * * * *

[Pg 67]

CHAPTER XV
----------

Terms Relating to Forms and Styles (*Continued*)
------------------------------------------------

(Sections [144](#SEC_144) to [160](#SEC_160) relate particularly to
terms used in descriptions of *monophonic*
music[[33]](#Footnote_33_33).)

​144. A *phrase* is a short musical thought (at least two measures in
length) closing with either a complete or an incomplete cadence. The
typical *phrase* is four measures long. The two-measure *phrase* is
often called *section*. The word *phrase* as used in music terminology
corresponds with the same word as used in language study.

​145. A *period* is a little piece of music typically eight measures
long, either complete in itself or forming one of the clearly defined
divisions of a larger form. The *period* (when complete in itself) is
the smallest monophonic form.

The essential characteristic of the *regular period* is the fact that it
usually consists of two balanced phrases (often called *antecedent* and
*consequent* or *thesis* and *antithesis*), the first phrase giving rise
to the feeling of incompleteness (by means of a cadence in another key,
deceptive cadence, etc.,) the second phrase giving the effect of
completeness by means of a definite cadence at the close.

The second half of the period is sometimes a literal repetition of the
first half, in all respects except the cadence, but in many cases too it
is a repetition of only one of the elements—rhythm, intervals, or
general outline. Figs. 58 and 59 show examples of both types. The
principle almost invariably holds that the simpler the music (cf.
folk-tunes) the more obvious the form of the period, while the more
complex the music, the less regular the period.

[Pg 68]

 

![Figs. 58-59](images/fig58-59.jpg "Figs. 58-59")

[[Listen to Fig. 58]](music/fig58.mid)

[[Listen to Fig. 59]](music/fig59.mid)

 

​146. The *primary forms* are built up by combining two or more periods.

The *small two-part primary form* (often called *song-form* or
*Lied-form*) consists of two periods so placed that the second
constitutes a consequent or antithesis to the first. The second half of
this second period is often exactly the same as the second half of the
first period, thus binding the two periods together into absolute unity.
The theme of the choral movement of the Ninth Symphony (Beethoven)
quoted below is a perfect example of this form. Other examples are
"Drink to Me Only With Thine Eyes," and "The Last Rose of Summer."

 

![Beethoven](images/beethoven1.jpg "Beethoven")

![Beethoven](images/beethoven2.jpg "Beethoven")

[[Listen]](music/beethoven.mid)

 

[Pg 69]

The *small three-part primary form* is like the two-part primary form
except that it has a section of contrasting material interpolated
between the two periods. This middle part is usually an eight-measure
phrase.

The *large two- and three-part primary forms* usually have
sixteen-measure periods instead of eight-measure ones, but are otherwise
similar in construction.

These various *primary forms* are used in constructing many varieties of
compositions, among them the *theme and variations*, the *polka*, the
*waltz*, the *march*, etc., as well as most of the shorter movements in
sonatas, quartets, etc. They are used in vocal music also, but are less
apt to be regular here because the form of vocal music is largely
dependent upon the structure of the text.

​147. A *theme* is a fragment of melody used as the subject of a fugue,
as the basis of the development section in "sonata form," etc. Sometimes
it is a complete tune (often in period form), on which variations are
made, as *e.g.*, in the familiar *theme and variations*.

​148. *Thematic development* consists in taking a short theme (or
several short themes) and by means of transposition, interval expansion
and contraction, rhythmic augmentation and diminution, inversion,
tonality changes, etc., building out of it a lengthy composition or
section of a composition. Fig. 60 *b*, *c*, *d*, *e*, and *f* show how
the theme given in Fig. 60 (*a*) may be varied in a few of these ways.
There are hundreds of other fashions in which this same theme might be
varied without destroying its identity. For other examples of thematic
development see the development section of Sonata Op. 31, No. 3, as
analyzed in [Appendix E](#APPENDIX_E).

 

![Fig. 60](images/fig60a.jpg "Fig. 60")

![Fig. 60](images/fig60b.jpg "Fig. 60")

[[Listen]](music/fig60.mid)

 

[Pg 70]

For further illustrations of development in the case of this same theme,
see—Christiani—The Principles of Expression in Pianoforte playing, p.
144, ff. from which the foregoing themes have been adapted.

​149. A *rondo* is an instrumental composition (in homophonic style) in
which a certain theme appears several times almost always in the same
form (*i.e.*, not thematically varied), the repetitions of this theme
being separated by contrasting material.

The *rondo* is the oldest of the larger monophonic forms and has been
used in many different ways, but perhaps its most characteristic
construction is as follows: (1) Principal subject; (2) second subject in
dominant key; (3) principal subject; (4) third subject; (5) first
subject again; (6) second subject, in *tonic key*; (7) coda (or ending).

The student should note particularly the problem of repetition and
contrast (mentioned in [Sec. 134](#SEC_134)) as here worked out, as the
rondo was the first monophonic form in which this matter was at all
satisfactorily solved, and its construction is especially interesting
because it is readily seen to be one of the direct predecessors of the
highest form of all—the sonata. Examples of rondos may be found in any
volume of sonatas or sonatinas.

​150. A *suite* is a set of instrumental dances all in the same or in
nearly related keys. The first dance is usually preceded by an
introduction or prelude, and the various dances are so grouped as to
secure contrast of movement—a quick dance being usually followed by a
slower one.[Pg 71]

The suite is interesting to students of the development of music as
being the first form *in several movements* to be generally adopted by
composers. It retained its popularity from the beginning of the
seventeenth to the end of the eighteenth centuries, being finally
displaced by the sonata, whose immediate predecessor it is thus seen to
be.

The *suite* was formerly written for solo instrument only (harpsichord,
clavichord, piano) but modern composers like Dvořák, Lachner,
Moszkowski, and others have written suites for full orchestra also.

​151. Among the dances commonly found in suites are the following:

*Allemande*—duple or quadruple measure.

*Bolero*—triple measure.

*Bourée*—duple or quadruple measure.

*Chaconne*—triple measure.

*Courante*—a very old dance in triple measure.

*Csardas*—Hungarian dance in duple or quadruple measure.

*Gavotte*—quadruple measure.

*Gigue* (or *jig*)—duple measure.

*Habanera*—Spanish dance in triple measure.

*Minuet*—slow dance in triple measure.

*Mazurka*—Polish dance in triple measure.

*Polonaise*—Polish dance in triple measure.

*Rigaudon*—lively dance in duple or triple measure.

*Sarabande*—triple measure.

*Tarantella*—swift Italian dance in sextuple measure.

The *allemande* is especially interesting to students of music form
because of its relation to the sonata, it being the prototype of the
sonata-allegro (*i.e.*, the first movement of the sonata). The
*sarabande* and *courante* are likewise interesting as the prototypes of
the second movement, and the *bourée*, *minuet*, etc., for their
connection with the third movement.

​152. The *scherzo* (lit. musical joke) is a fanciful instrumental
composition. It was used by Beethoven as the third movement of the
sonata instead of the more limited minuet, but is also often found as an
independent piece.

​153. A *sonata* is an instrumental composition of three or more
movements (usually four), the first and last of which are[Pg 72] almost
always in rapid tempo. Each of these movements is a piece of music with
a unity of its own, but they are all merged together in a larger whole
with a broad underlying unity of larger scope. The composition receives
its name from the fact that its first movement is cast in *sonata-form*.
(See [Sec. 157](#SEC_157) for description of sonata-form.)

When the *sonata* has four movements, these are usually arranged as
follows:

​1. A quick movement (*allegro*, *presto*, etc.), often preceded by a
slower introduction.

​2. A slow movement (*largo*, *andante*, *adagio*, etc.).

​3. A minuet or scherzo, often with a trio added, in which case the part
preceding the trio is repeated after the trio is played.

​4. A quick movement—the finale, sometimes a rondo, sometimes another
sonata-form, sometimes a theme with variations.

These movements are all in closely related keys, but in a variety of
contrasting rhythms.

​154. A *trio* is a sonata for three instruments (such as piano, violin,
and cello), while a *quartet* is a sonata for four instruments, the most
common quartet combination being as follows: First and second violins,
viola, and violoncello.

The term *chamber music* is often applied to instrumental music for
trio, quartet, quintet, and other similar combinations which are
suitable for a small room rather than for a large concert hall.

The words *trio* and *quartet* are also applied to vocal works for three
and four voices respectively, these having no relation whatsoever to the
sonata as described above. The word *trio* is also applied to the middle
section of minuets, scherzas, marches, etc., the term originating in the
old usage of writing this part for three instruments only.

​155. A *concerto* is a sonata for a solo instrument with orchestral
accompaniment, the form being usually somewhat modified so as to adapt
it to a composition in which there must[Pg 73] necessarily be
opportunity for a good deal of technical display. There are usually but
three movements in the *concerto*.

The great majority of *concertos* are for piano and orchestra, but
examples of concertos for violin, cello, flute, oboe, and other solo
instruments (all with orchestral accompaniment) have also been written.
A few modern composers have applied the term *concerto* to certain large
organ works (with no orchestral accompaniment, the composition being
written for just the one instrument), but this use of the word is so
contrary to the accepted definition that it is hardly justifiable.

When a concerto is played on two pianos (without orchestra), this does
not mean that there is no orchestral part, but that there is no
orchestra to play it, and so the parts that should be played by the
orchestral instruments have simply been arranged for a second piano
(sometimes organ).

​156. A *symphony* is a sonata for full orchestra. In general its
construction is the same as that of the sonata, but it is usually of
much larger proportions and has in it much greater variety of both tonal
and rhythmic material. The symphony is generally conceded to be the
highest type of instrumental music ever evolved.

The *symphony* was accepted as a standard form in the time of Haydn
(1732-1809) and was developed enormously by Haydn himself, Mozart
(1756-1791), and Beethoven (1770-1827), reaching perhaps its highest
point in the famous "Nine Symphonies" of the last-named composer. Later
symphony writers whose works are at present being performed include
Schumann, Tschaikowsky, and Dvořák.

The word *symphony* was formerly used synonymously with *ritornelle*,
both words being applied to instrumental interludes between parts of
vocal works, but this usage has now entirely disappeared.

​157. *Sonata-form* (sometimes called *sonata-allegro*) is a plan for
the construction of instrumental music (sonatas, quartets, symphonies,
etc.), in which three rather definite divisions always occur, the third
division being a more or less literal repetition of the first.

These *three parts of sonata-form* with their usual subdivisions are:

I. Exposition

​(1) Principal theme (or first subject).

​(2) Link-episode (or modulation group).

​(3) Secondary theme (or song group), always in a nearly related key.

​(4) Closing group.

​(5) Coda.

[Pg 74]

​II. Development Section

Treating the themes introduced in the exposition in an almost infinite
variety of fashions, according to the principles of thematic
development. (See [Sec. 148](#SEC_148)).

​III. Recapitulation (or Reprise)

Consisting essentially of the same subdivisions found in the
*exposition*, but differing from this first section in one essential
point, viz., that instead of stating the secondary theme in a *related*
key, the entire recapitulation is in the *principal* key. This third
section is always followed by a coda (which may either be very short or
quite extended), bringing the whole movement to a more definite close.

The second part of *sonata-form* (the development section) is sometimes
the longest and most intricate of the three divisions, and it is at this
point that the composer has an opportunity of displaying to the full his
originality and inventive skill. It is principally because of this
development section that the sonata is so far superior as a *form* to
its predecessors. For an analyzed example of *sonata-form*, see
[Appendix E](#APPENDIX_E). The student is advised to take other sonatas
and go through the first movements with a view to finding at least the
three main divisions mentioned above. In some cases the form will of
course be so irregular that all the parts indicated cannot be
discovered, but the general outlines of the scheme will always be
present.

​158. A *sonatina*, as its name implies, is a little sonata. It differs
from the sonata proper principally in having little or no development,
the second section being of slight importance as compared with the
corresponding section of a sonata.

A *grand sonata* is like an ordinary sonata in form, but is of unusually
large dimensions.

​159. *Program music* is instrumental music which is supposed to convey
to the listener an image or a succession of images that will arouse in
him certain emotions which have been previously aroused in the
composer's mind by some scene, event, or idea. The clue to the general
idea is usually given at the beginning of the music in the form of a
poem or a short description of the thing in the mind of the composer,
but there are many examples in which there is no clue whatsoever except
the title of the composition.

*Program music* represents a mean between *pure music* (cf. the piano
sonata or the string quartet) on the one hand, and *descriptive music*
(in which actual imitations of bird-calls, whistles, the blowing of the
wind, the galloping of horses, the rolling of thunder, etc., occur), on
the other. Most program music is written for the orchestra, examples
being Liszt's "The Preludes," Strauss' "Till Eulenspiegel," etc.

[Pg 75]

​160. A *symphonic poem* (or *tone poem*) is an orchestral composition
of large dimensions (resembling the symphony in size), usually embodying
the program idea. It has no prescribed form and seems indeed to be often
characterized by an almost total lack of design, but there are also
examples of symphonic poems in which the same theme runs throughout the
entire composition, being adapted at the various points at which it
occurs to the particular moods expressed by the *program* at those
points.

The *symphonic poem* was invented by Liszt (1811-1886) and has since
been used extensively by Strauss, Saint-Saëns and others. It came into
existence as a part of the general movement which has caused the fugue
and the sonata successively to go out of fashion, viz., the tendency to
invent forms which would not hamper the composer in any way, but would
leave him absolutely free to express his ideas in his own individual
way.

* * * * *

[Pg 76]

CHAPTER XVI
-----------

Terms Relating to Vocal Music
-----------------------------

​161. An *anthem* is a sacred choral composition, usually based on
Biblical or liturgical[[34]](#Footnote_34_34) words. It may or may not
have an instrumental accompaniment, and is usually written in four
parts, but may have five, six, eight, or more.

The word *anthem* is derived from *antifona* (or *antiphona*), meaning a
psalm or hymn sung responsively, *i.e.*, *antiphonally*, by two choirs,
or by choir and congregation.

A *full anthem* is one containing no solo parts; a *solo anthem* is one
in which the solo part is predominant over the chorus, while a *verse
anthem* is one in which the chorus parts alternate with passages for
concerted solo voices (*i.e.*, trios, quartets, etc.).

​162. *A capella* (sometimes spelled *cappella*) or *alla capella music*
is part-singing (either sacred or secular) without accompaniment.

This term means literally "in chapel style," and refers to the fact that
in the early days of the church all singing was unaccompanied.

​163. *A motet* is a sacred choral composition in contrapuntal style. It
has no solo parts, thus corresponding to the madrigal (q.v.) in secular
music. The motet is intended for *a capella* performance, but is often
given with organ accompaniment.

​164. A *choral* is a hymn-tune of the German Protestant Church. It is
usually harmonized in four voices. The *choral* (sometimes spelled
*chorale*) is described as having "a plain melody, a strong harmony, and
a stately rhythm." It differs from the ordinary English and American
hymn-tune in being[Pg 77] usually sung at a much slower tempo, and in
having a pause at the end of each line of text.

​165. The *mass* is the liturgy for the celebration of the Lord's Supper
in the service of the Roman Catholic Church. As used in the terminology
of music the word refers to the six hymns which are always included when
a composer writes a musical *mass*, and which form the basis of the
celebration of the Communion.[[35]](#Footnote_35_35) These six hymns are
as follows:

*Kyrie.*

*Gloria* (including the *Gratias agimus*, *Qui tollis*, *Quoniam*, *Cum
Sancto Spirito*).

*Credo* (including the *Et Incarnatus*, *Crucifixus*, and *Et
Resurrexit*).

*Sanctus* (including the *Hosanna*).

*Benedictus.*

*Agnus Dei* (including the *Dona nobis*).

The *requiem mass* is the "mass for the dead" and differs considerably
from the ordinary mass. Both regular and requiem *masses* have been
written by many of the great composers (Bach, Beethoven, Verdi, Gounod),
and in many cases these *masses* are so complex that they are not
practicable for the actual service of the Church, and are therefore
performed only by large choral societies, as concert works.

​166. A *cantata* is a vocal composition for chorus and soloists, the
text being either sacred or secular. The accompaniment may be written
for piano, organ, or orchestra.

When sacred in character the *cantata* differs from the oratorio in
being shorter and less dramatic, in not usually having definite
characters, and in being written for church use, while the oratorio is
intended for concert performance.

When secular in subject the *cantata* differs from the opera in not
usually having definite characters, and in being always rendered without
scenery or action.

Examples of the *sacred cantata* are: Stainer's "The Crucifixion,"
Clough-Leighter's "The Righteous Branch," and Gaul's "The Holy City."
Examples of the *secular cantata* are: Bruch's "Armenius,"
Coleridge-Taylor's "Hiawatha."

​167. An *oratorio* is a composition on a large scale for chorus,
soloists, and orchestra, the text usually dealing with some religious
subject. The *oratorio*, as noted above, is not[Pg 78] intended for the
church service, but is written for concert performance.

​168. An *opera* is a composition for vocal soloists, chorus, and
orchestra, with characters, action, scenery, and dramatic movement. It
is a drama set to music.

*Grand opera* is opera with a serious plot, in which everything is sung,
there being no spoken dialog at all.

*Opera comique* is a species of opera in which part of the dialog is
spoken and part sung. *Opera comique* is not synonymous with *comic
opera*, for the plot of opera comique is as often serious as not. In
fact the entire distinction between the terms *grand opera* and *opera
comique* is being broken down, the latter term referring merely to
operas first given at the Opera Comique in Paris, and the former term to
those given at the Grand Opera House in the same city.

A *comic opera* is a humorous opera, the plot providing many amusing
situations and the whole ending happily. It corresponds with the
*comedy* in literature.

A *light opera* is one with an exceedingly trivial plot, in which songs,
dances, and pretty scenery contribute to the amusement of the audience.
The music is lively, but usually as trivial as the plot.

The term *music drama* was used by Wagner in referring to his own
*operas*, and is also sometimes applied to other modern *operas* in
which the dramatic element is supposed to predominate over the musical.

​169. A *libretto* (lit.—little book) is the word-text of an opera,
oratorio, cantata, or some other similar work.

​170. *Recitative* is a style of vocal solo common to operas, oratorios,
and cantatas, especially those written some time ago. Its main
characteristic is that the word-text is of paramount importance, both
rhythm and tone-progression being governed by rhetorical rather than by
musical considerations.

*Recitative* undoubtedly originated in the intoning of the priest in the
ritualistic service of the Church, but when applied to the opera it
became an important means of securing dramatic effects, especially in
situations in which the action of the play moved along rapidly.
*Recitative* is thus seen to be a species of musical declamation.

In the early examples of *recitative* there was scarcely any
accompaniment, often only one instrument (like the cello) being employed
to play a sort of obbligato melody: when full chords were played they
were not written out in the score, but were merely indicated in a more
or less general way by certain signs and figures. (See "thorough-bass,"
[p. 85](#Page_85), [Sec. 200](#SEC_200).)

But about the middle of the seventeenth century a slightly different
style of *recitative* was invented, and in this type the orchestra was
employed much more freely in the accompaniment, especially in the parts
between the phrases of the text, but to some extent also to support the
voice while singing. This new style was called *recitativo stromento*
(*i.e.*, accompanied recitative), while the original type was called
*recitativo secco* (*i.e.*, dry recitative).[Pg 79]

During the last century the style of *recitative* has been still further
developed by Gluck and Wagner, both of whom used the orchestra as an
independent entity, with interesting melodies, harmonies and rhythms all
its own, while the vocal part is a sort of obbligato to this
accompaniment. But even in this latest phase of *recitative*, it is the
word-text that decides the style of both melody and rhythm in the voice
part. Fig. 61 shows an example of *dry recitative*, taken from "The
Messiah."

 

![Messiah](images/fig61.jpg "Messiah")

[[Listen]](music/fig61.mid)

 

​171. *Aria* is likewise a style of vocal solo found in operas, etc.,
but its predominating characteristic is diametrically opposed to that of
the recitative. In the *aria* the word-text is usually entirely
subordinate to the melody, and the latter is often very ornate,
containing trills, runs, etc.

The rendition of this ornate style of music is often referred to as
"coloratura singing," but it should be noted that not all *arias* are
coloratura in style.

The familiar solos from The Messiah—"Rejoice Greatly," and "The trumpet
shall sound" are good examples of the aria style.

[Pg 80]

​172. A *lied* (Ger. = song) is a vocal solo in which the text, the
melody, and the accompaniment contribute more or less equally to the
effect of the whole.

Strictly speaking the word *lied* means "a poem to be sung," and this
meaning will explain at once the difference between the *lied* on the
one hand, and the Italian recitative and aria on the other, for in the
*lied* the text is of great importance, but the music is also
interesting, while in the recitative the text was important but the
music very slight, and in the aria the text was usually inconsequential
while the music held the center of interest.

The most pronounced characteristic of the *lied* is the fact that it
usually portrays a single mood, sentiment, or picture, thus differing
from the ballad, which is narrative in style. It will be noted that this
"single mood, or sentiment, or picture" was originally conceived by the
poet who wrote the word-text, and that the composer in writing music to
this text has first tried to get at the thought of the poet, and has
then attempted to compose music which would intensify and make more
vivid that thought. This intensification of the poet's thought comes as
often through the rhythm, harmony, and dynamics of the accompaniment as
through the expressiveness of the voice part.

The style of song-writing in which each verse is sung to the same tune
is called the "strophe form," while that in which each verse has a
different melody is often referred to as the "continuous" or
"through-composed" form (Ger. durch-componiert).

​173. A *ballad* was originally a short, simple song, the words being in
narrative style, *i.e.*, the word-text telling a story. In the earlier
*ballads* each verse of the poem was usually sung to the same tune
(strophe form), but in the *art-ballad* as developed by Loewe and others
the continuous style of composition is employed, this giving the
composer greater opportunities of making vivid through his music the
events described by the poem. These later *ballads* are in consequence
neither "short" nor "simple" but compare in structure with the lied
itself.[Pg 81]

​174. A *folk-song* is a short song sung by and usually originating
among the common people. Its dominant characteristic is usually
*simplicity*, this applying to word-text, melody, and accompaniment (if
there is one). The text of the *folk-song* is usually based on some
event connected with ordinary life, but there are also many examples in
which historical and legendary happenings are dealt with. Auld Lang
Syne, and Comin' thru the Rye, are examples of *folk-songs*.

There has been some difference of opinion as to whether a song, the
composer of which is known, can ever constitute a real *folk-song*:
recent writers seem to be taking the sensible view of the matter, viz.:
that if a song has the characteristics of a folk- rather than an
art-song, and if it remains popular for some time among the common
people, then it is just as much a *folk-song* whether the composer
happens to be known or not.

​175. A *madrigal* is a secular vocal composition having from three to
eight parts. It is in contrapuntal style, like the motet, and is usually
sung a capella.

​176. A *glee* is a vocal composition in three or more parts, being
usually more simple in style than the madrigal, and sometimes having
more than one movement. The *glee* may be either gay or sad in mood, and
seems to be a composition peculiar to the English people.

​177. A *part-song* is a composition for two or more voices, (usually
four) to be sung a capella. It is written in monophonic rather than in
polyphonic style, thus differing from the madrigal and glee. Morley's
"Now is the Month of Maying" is an example of the *part-song*, as is
also Sullivan's "O Hush Thee, My Baby." The term *part-song* is often
loosely applied to glees, madrigals, etc.

* * * * *

[Pg 82]

CHAPTER XVII
------------

Rhythm, Melody, Harmony and Intervals
-------------------------------------

​178. The *four elements* commonly attributed to music (in the order of
their development) are: Rhythm, Melody, Harmony, and Timbre (or
tone-color).

​179. *Rhythm* is the regular recurrence of accent. In music it is more
specifically the regular recurrence of groups of accented and
non-accented beats (or pulses)—according to some specified
measure-system. Since rhythm implies continuity, there must usually be
at least two such measure groups in order to make musical rhythm
possible. (See [p. 44](#Page_44), [Sec. 97](#SEC_97).)

​180. A *melody* is a succession of single tones of various pitches so
arranged that the effect of the whole will be unified, coherent, and
pleasing to the ear.

The soprano part of hymn-tunes and other simple harmonized compositions
is often referred to as "the melody."

​181. *Harmony* is the science of chord construction and combination.

The term *harmony* refers to tones sounding simultaneously, *i.e.*, to
*chords*, as differentiated from tones sounding consecutively, as in
melody. The word *harmony* may therefore be applied to any group of
tones of different pitches sounded as a chord, although specifically we
usually refer to a *succession* of such chords when we speak of
"harmony." It is possible to use the same combination of tones in either
melody or harmony; in fact these two elements as applied to modern music
have developed together and the style of present-day melody is directly
based upon the development that has recently taken place in harmonic
construction.

*Harmony* (as contrasted with *counterpoint*) first began to be an
important factor in music about 1600 A.D., *i.e.*, at the time when
opera and oratorio came into existence, when form was established, and
when our modern major and minor scales were adopted. Before this
practically all music was composed on a contrapuntal basis.

​182. *Timbre* is that peculiar quality of sound which enables one to
distinguish a tone produced by one instrument (or[Pg 83] voice) from a
tone produced by an equal number of vibrations on another instrument.

The word *timbre* is synonymous with the terms *quality of tone*, and
*tone quality* (Ger.—Klang-farbe), the excuse for using it being that it
expresses adequately in one word an idea that in our language takes at
least two: this excuse would disappear (and incidentally a
much-mispronounced word would be eliminated) if the single word
*quality* were to be adopted as the equivalent of *timbre*. Thus,
*e.g.*, the soprano voice singing c' has a *quality* different from the
contralto voice singing the same tone.

(The remainder of this chapter and all of [Chapter
XVIII](#CHAPTER_XVIII) deal with terms commonly encountered in the study
of *harmony*. Courses in this subject usually begin with a study of
scales, but since this subject has already been somewhat extensively
treated, this chapter will omit it, and will begin with the next topic
in harmony study, viz.—the interval.)

​183. An *interval* is the relation of two tones with regard to pitch.
If the two tones are sounded simultaneously the result is an *harmonic
interval*, but if sounded consecutively the result is a *melodic
interval*. Fig. 62 represents the pitches f' and a' as a harmonic
interval, while Fig. 63 represents the same pitches arranged as a
melodic interval.

 

![Figs. 62-63](images/fig62-63.jpg "Figs. 62-63")

[[Listen]](music/fig62-63.mid)

 

​184. In classifying intervals two facts should be constantly kept in
mind:

​(1) The *number name* of the interval (third, fifth, sixth, etc.), is
derived from the order of letters as found in the diatonic scale. Thus
the interval C—E is a *third* because E is the third tone from C
(counting C as one) in the diatonic scale. C—G is a *fifth* because G is
the fifth tone above C in the diatonic scale.

It should be noted however that the same *number-names* apply even
though one or both letters of the interval are qualified by sharps,
flats, etc. Thus *e.g.*, C—G♯ is still a *fifth*, as are also C♯—G♭ and
C♭—G♯.

​(2) In determining the *specific* name of any interval (*perfect*
fifth, *major* third, etc.), the half-step and whole-step (often
referred to respectively as *minor*[Pg 84] *second*, and *major second*)
are used as units of measurement.

The *half-step* is usually defined as "the smallest usable interval
between two tones." Thus, C—C♯ is a *half-step*, as are also B—C, F—G♭,
etc.

A *whole-step* consists of two half-steps. C—D is a *whole-step*, as are
also B♭—C, E—F♯, F♯—G♯, G♭—A♭, etc.

The expressions *half-step* and *whole-step* are much to be preferred to
*half-tone* and *whole-tone*, as being more clear and definite. Thus
*e.g.*, the sentence "The two tones are a *half-step* apart" is much
better than "The two tones are a *half-tone* apart."

​185. A *prime* is the relation between two tones whose pitches are
properly represented by the same degree of the staff.

A *perfect prime* is one whose tones have the same pitch. Middle C
sounded by piano and violin at the same time would offer an example.

An *augmented prime* is one whose second tone is one half-step higher
than the first. Ex. C—C♯.

​186. A *second* is the relation between two tones whose pitches are
properly represented by adjacent degrees of the staff. (The first line
and first space are adjacent degrees, as are also the third line and
fourth space.)

A *minor second* is one comprising one half-step. Ex. B—C.

A *major second* is one comprising two half-steps. Ex. B—C♯.

An *augmented second* is one comprising three half-steps. Ex. F—G♯.

​187. A *third* is an interval comprising two seconds.

A *diminished third* has two minor seconds (*i.e.*, two half-steps).
C—E♭♭.

A *minor third* has one minor and one major second (*i.e.*, three
half-steps). C—E♭.

A *major third* has two major seconds (*i.e.*, four half-steps). C—E.

​188. *A fourth* is an interval comprising three seconds.[Pg 85]

A *diminished fourth* has two minor and one major second. C♯—F.

A *perfect fourth* has one minor and two major seconds. C—F.

An *augmented fourth* (tritone) has three major seconds. C—F♯.

​189. A *fifth* is an interval comprising four seconds.

A *diminished fifth* has two minor and two major seconds. C—G♭.

A *perfect fifth* has one minor and three major seconds. C—G.

An *augmented fifth* has four major seconds. C—G♯.

​190. A *sixth* is an interval comprising five seconds.

A *minor sixth* has two minor and three major seconds. C—A♭.

A *major sixth* has one minor and four major seconds. C—A.

An *augmented sixth* has five major seconds. C—A♯.

​191. A *seventh* is an interval comprising six seconds.

A *diminished seventh* has three minor and three major seconds. C—B♭♭.

A *minor seventh* has two minor and four major seconds. C—B♭.

A *major seventh* has one minor and five major seconds. C—B.

​192. An *octave* is an interval comprising seven seconds.

A *diminished octave* has three minor and four major seconds. C—C♭.

*A perfect octave* has two minor and five major seconds. C—C.

An *augmented octave* has one minor and six major seconds. C—C♯.

​193. A *ninth* is usually treated as a second, a *tenth* as a third,
etc. The interval of two octaves is often referred to as a
*fifteenth*.[Pg 86]

​194. If the major diatonic scale be written and the interval between
each tone and the key-tone noted, it will be observed that the intervals
are all either major or perfect. See Fig. 64.

 

![Fig. 64](images/fig64.jpg "Fig. 64")

[[Listen]](music/fig64.mid)

 

In this connection also it will be noted that the interval next smaller
than *major* is always *minor*, while that next smaller than *perfect*
or *minor* is always *diminished*: but that the interval next larger
than both *major* and *perfect* is *augmented*.

​195. An interval is said to be *inverted* when the tone originally the
upper becomes the lower. Thus C—E, a major third, inverted becomes E—C,
a minor sixth.

* * * * *

[Pg 87]

CHAPTER XVIII
-------------

Chords, Cadences, Etc.
----------------------

​196. A *chord* is a combination of several tones sounding together and
bearing an harmonic relation to each other. The simplest chord is the
*triad*, which consists of a fundamental tone called the *root*, with
the third and fifth above it. C—E—G is a triad, as are also D—F—A,
F—A—C, and G—B—D.

​197. Triads are classified as *major*, *minor*, *diminished*, or
*augmented*.

A *major triad* has a major third and a perfect fifth, *i.e.*, it is a
major third with a minor third on top of it. Ex. C—E—G.

A *minor triad* has a minor third and a perfect fifth, *i.e.*, it is a
minor third with a major third on top of it. Ex. C—E♭—G.

A *diminished triad* has a minor third and a diminished fifth, *i.e.*,
it is a minor third with another minor third on top of it. Ex. C—E♭—G♭.

An *augmented triad* has a major third and an augmented fifth, *i.e.*,
it is a major third with another major third on top of it. Ex. C—E—G♯.

​198. A triad may be built on any scale-tone, but those on I, IV, and V,
are used so much oftener than the others that they are often called the
*common chords*. In referring to triads the Roman numerals are used to
show on what scale-tone the triad is based, the size of the numeral
(with other signs) indicating the kind of triad found on each tone of
the scale. Thus *e.g.*, the large I shows that the triad on the first
tone (in major) is a *major triad*, the small ii shows that the[Pg 88]
triad on the second tone is minor, etc. The following figure will make
this clear.

 

![Fig. 65](images/fig65.jpg "Fig. 65")

[[Listen]](music/fig65.mid)

 

The triads in the minor scale are as follows:

 

![minor triads](images/triads.jpg "minor triads")

[[Listen]](music/triads.mid)

 

​199. A triad is said to be *in fundamental position* when its root is
the lowest tone. It is said to be in the *first inversion* when the
*third* is the lowest tone, and in the *second inversion* when the fifth
is the lowest tone. Thus *e.g.*, in Fig. 66 the same chord (C—E—G) is
arranged in three different positions, at (a) in fundamental position,
at (b) in the first inversion, and at (c) in the second inversion.

 

![Fig. 66](images/fig66.jpg "Fig. 66")

[[Listen]](music/fig66.mid)

 

​200. When the root is not the bass note, figures are sometimes used to
show what chord is to be played or written. Thus, *e.g.*, the figure 6
over a bass note means that the note given is the *third* of a chord,
the root being found by going up a sixth from the bass note: *i.e.*, the
chord is to be sounded in its first inversion. In the same way the
figures 6/4 indicate that the note given is the *fifth* of the chord,
the root and fifth being found by going up a sixth and a fourth from the
note given; *i.e.*, the chord is to be sounded in its second
inversion.[Pg 89]

The use of these and other similar figures and signs is called *figured
bass* (or *thorough bass*) *notation*. An example of a *figured bass* is
given in Fig. 67.

 

![Fig. 67](images/fig67.jpg "Fig. 67")

[[Listen]](music/fig67.mid)

 

*Thorough bass notation* was formerly used extensively in writing
accompaniments to vocal works, the accompanist having to interpret the
notes and signs given, and then to make up an interesting accompaniment
as he went along. Much of Handel's music was written in this way, but in
modern editions of these works the chords have been printed in full and
the signs omitted.

​201. A *seventh chord* consists of a fundamental tone with its third,
fifth, and seventh. The fifth is sometimes omitted. A *ninth chord*
consists of a fundamental with its third, fifth, seventh, and ninth.

​202. A *cadence* is the close of a musical phrase: in melody it refers
to the last two tones; in harmony to the last two chords.

The word *cadence* is derived from *cadere*, a Latin word meaning to
*fall*, the reference being to the falling of the voice (*i.e.*, the
dropping to the normal pitch) at the close of a sentence.

​203. The most frequent cadence in harmony is that involving the chord
on I preceded by the chord on V. Because of its directness the cadence
V—I is called the *authentic cadence*.

​204. The most satisfactory form (to the ear) of the authentic cadence
is that in which the highest voice (the soprano) of the final chord is
the *root* of that chord. When the final chord appears in this position
the cadence is called *perfect*[[36]](#Footnote_36_36) *authentic*,[Pg
90] and when the third or fifth of the chord appear in the soprano, the
cadence is called *imperfect authentic*. Fig. 68 shows the chord G—B—D
cadencing to C—E—G in three different ways. The first one (a) is called
a *perfect authentic cadence*, but the last two (c) and (d) are
*imperfect authentic*.

 

![Fig. 68](images/fig68.jpg "Fig. 68")

[[Listen]](music/fig68.mid)

 

​205. A *plagal cadence* is one in which the tonic chord is preceded by
the sub-dominant chord (IV—I). The *plagal cadence* (sometimes called
the *church cadence*, or *amen cadence*), like the authentic, is
described as being *perfect* when the soprano of the tonic chord is the
root of that chord, and *imperfect* when the soprano of the final chord
is the third or fifth of that chord. Fig. 69 shows the chord F—A—C
cadencing to C—E—G in three ways. The first one (a) is called a *perfect
plagal cadence*, the last two are *imperfect plagal*.

 

![Fig. 69](images/fig69.jpg "Fig. 69")

[[Listen]](music/fig69.mid)

 

​206. A *half-cadence* occurs when the dominant chord is used as the
final chord of a phrase, and is immediately preceded by the tonic chord.
This form is used to give variety in the course of a composition, but is
not available at the end because it does not give a definite close in
the tonic key. Fig. 70 shows the use of the *half-cadence* at the close
of such a phrase.[Pg 91]

 

![Fig. 70. Bach](images/fig70.jpg "Fig. 70. Bach")

[[Listen]](music/fig70.mid)

 

​207. A *deceptive cadence* is the progression of the dominant chord to
some other chord than the tonic, the word *deceptive* implying that the
ear expects to hear V resolve to I and is deceived when it does not do
so. The most common form of *deceptive cadence* is that in which V (or
V^7^) resolves to VI. It is used to give variety, but as in the case of
the half-cadence, is not available at the end of a composition. Fig. 71
gives an example.

 

![Fig. 71. Wm. Mather](images/fig71.jpg "Fig. 71. Wm. Mather")

[[Listen]](music/fig71.mid)

 

​208. A *sequence* is a succession of similar harmonic progressions,
these resulting from a typical or symmetrical movement of the bass part.
See Fig. 72.

 

![Fig. 72](images/fig72.jpg "Fig. 72")

[[Listen]](music/fig72.mid)

 

The word *sequence* is also applied to a succession of similar melodic
progressions, as in Fig. 73.[Pg 92]

 

![Fig. 73](images/fig73.jpg "Fig. 73")

[[Listen]](music/fig73.mid)

 

​209. *Modulation* is a change of key without any break in the
continuity of chords or melody tones. *Harmonic modulations* are usually
effected through the medium of a chord, some or all of whose tones are
common to both keys. Examples of both *harmonic* and *melodic
modulations* are shown in Figs. 74 and 75.

 

![Fig. 74](images/fig74.jpg "Fig. 74")

[[Listen]](music/fig74.mid)

 

The chord most frequently used in modulating is the *dominant seventh*,
*i.e.*, a seventh chord (see [Sec. 201](#SEC_201)) on the dominant tone
of the key. In the key of C this chord is G—B—D—F; in the key of D it is
A—C♯—E—G; in the key of A♭ it is E♭—G—B♭—D♭, etc.

 

![Fig. 75](images/fig75.jpg "Fig. 75")

[[Listen]](music/fig75.mid)

 

​210. A *suspension* is the temporary substitution of a tone a degree
higher than the regular chord-tone, this temporary tone being later
replaced by the regular chord-tone. See Fig. 76 (*a*).

 

![Fig. 76](images/fig76.jpg "Fig. 76")

[[Listen]](music/fig76.mid)

 

[Pg 93]

​211. A *retardation* is the temporary substitution of a tone a degree
lower than the regular tone, this tone (as in the case of the
suspension) being later replaced by the regular chord tone. See Fig. 77
(*a*).

 

![Fig. 77](images/fig77.jpg "Fig. 77")

[[Listen]](music/fig77.mid)

 

The "regular chord tone" to which both suspension and retardation
resolve is called the *tone of resolution*.

​212. The *anticipation* is a chord-tone introduced just before the rest
of the chord to which it belongs is sounded. See Fig. 78 (*a*).

 

![Fig. 78](images/fig78.jpg "Fig. 78")

[[Listen]](music/fig78.mid)

 

​213. A *pedal point* (or *organ point*) is a tone sustained through a
succession of harmonic progressions, to the chords of some of which it
usually belongs. The term *pedal point* originated in organ playing,
(where the foot on a pedal can sustain a tone while the hands are
playing a succession of harmonies), but as now used it may be applied to
any kind of music. The dominant and tonic are the tones most often used
in this way. See Fig. 79.[Pg 94]

 

![Fig. 79. Schumann](images/fig79.jpg "Fig. 79. Schumann")

[[Listen]](music/fig79.mid)

 

​214. When the upper three voices of a four-voice composition are
written close together (the soprano and tenor never appearing more than
an octave apart), the term *close position* is applied. But when the
upper voices are not written close together, the term *open position* is
applied.

​215. By *transposition* is meant playing, singing, or writing a piece
of music in some other key than the original. Thus *e.g.*, if a song
written in the key of G is too high in range for a soloist, the
accompanist sometimes *transposes* it to a lower key (as F or E), thus
causing all tones to sound a second or a third lower than they did when
the same song was played in the original key.

* * * * *

[Pg 95]

CHAPTER XIX
-----------

Miscellaneous Terms
-------------------

*A battuta*—with the beat; in strict rhythm.

*À quatre mains*—for four hands.

*Accompagnamento*—the accompaniment.

*All'unisono*—in unison.

*Alla breve*—2/2 measure.

The term *alla breve* is also sometimes used as a tempo indication, to
show a rate of speed so great that a half-note has a beat, *i.e.*, only
two beats in a measure—hence twice as fast as before.

*Alla capella*—usually the same as a capella (see [p. 76](#Page_76),
[Sec. 162](#SEC_162)) but sometimes *used* in the same sense as *alla
breve*.

*Alla marcia*—in march style.

*Alla zingara*—in gypsy style.

*Alt*—see *in alt*.

*Alto*—the lowest female voice. Range approximately g-e''.

The word *alto* is derived from the Latin word *altus*, meaning *high*,
the term being formerly applied to the highest male voice, which
originally sang (and still does so in many male choirs) the alto part.

*Animato come sopra*—in animated style as above.

*Antiphony* (*antiphonal*)—the responsive singing of two choirs, usually
one at either end of the church, or at either side of the chancel.

*Arabesque*—an instrumental composition in light, somewhat fantastic
style.

The term *arabesque* is derived from the word *Arabian*, and was
originally applied to a style of decoration.

*Arioso*—in the style of an air or song, *i.e.*, a flowing, vocal style.

*Attacca*—attack the next division without any pause.

*Attacca subito*—same as *attacca*.

*Attacca* *subito il seguente*—attack at once that which follows.

*Attack*—the promptness or firmness with which a phrase is begun.

*Bagpipe*—A Scotch instrument on which the tone is produced by a
combination of bellows and reeds. Its characteristic effect is the
continuous sounding of a low tone (sometimes several tones) while the
melody is being played on the higher reeds.

*Barcarole* (or *barcarolle*)—a boat song. Also applied to a vocal or
instrumental composition in the style of the gondolier's boat song.

*Baritone* (or *barytone*)—the male voice having a range between that of
the tenor and that of the bass. Approximate range G-g'.

*Bass*—the lowest male voice. Approximate range E-e'.

*Basso*—same as *bass*.

*Berceuse*—a cradle song.

*Binary form*—a form in two parts.

*Binary measure*—a measure having two beats.[Pg 96]

*Bis*—twice. Used to indicate a repetition. (Rare.)

*Brace*—the sign used to join several staffs, showing that all tones
represented on these staffs are to be performed together. The term is
often used also in referring to the music written on staffs so joined;
as—"Begin with the upper *brace*."

*Broken chord*—a chord whose tones are not all sounded simultaneously,
as *e.g.*, in an accompaniment group.

*Broken octave*—an octave whose tones are sounded one at a time instead
of simultaneously.

*Cacophony*—harsh, discordant, unpleasant, especially *incorrect*
combinations of tones. The opposite of *euphony*.

*Cadenza*—A brilliant passage, usually in an instrumental composition,
introduced just before the close of a movement. The *cadenza* was
formerly improvised by the performer, (thus giving an opportunity of
displaying his technical skill), but since Beethoven, composers have
usually written their own *cadenzas*.

*Cantabile*—in a singing style.

*Cantando*—same as *cantabile*.

*Canto*—the highest voice part; *i.e.*, the soprano part.

Note the derivation of *canto*, *cantabile*, etc., from the Latin word
*cantus*, meaning a *song*.

*Carol*—a hymn of joyful praise, usually sung in connection with Easter
or Christmas festivities. The word *carol* meant originally *a dance*,
hence the *happy* character of songs of this type.

*Catch*—a round set to humorous words.

*Chromatic* (noun)—a term somewhat loosely applied to any tone not
belonging to the key as indicated by the signature. Many teachers are
replacing the word *chromatic* in this sense with the term *intermediate
tone*, this term being applicable whether the foreign tone is actually
used for ornamental purposes as a *chromatic*, or to effect a
modulation. Thus *e.g.*, "F♯ is the *intermediate tone* between F and G
in the key of C."

*Clavichord*—an instrument with keys, resembling the square piano in
appearance. The tone was produced by forcing wedge-shaped pieces of
metal against the strings, thus setting them in vibration. The
*clavichord* was one of the immediate predecessors of the piano, much of
the music written by Bach being composed for it, although this music is
now played on the modern piano.

*Colla voce*—with the voice: *i.e.*, play the accompaniment according to
the soloist's performance rather than strictly according to the rhythm
indicated in the score.

*Colla parte*—same as *colla voce*.

*Coloratura*—florid passages in singing. Also applied to the style of
singing employed in rendering such passages. (See [p. 76](#Page_76),
[Sec. 171](#SEC_171).)

*Consonance*—A combination of tones agreeable to the ear and requiring
no resolution to other tone-combinations in order to give the effect of
finality. The major triad C—E—G is an example of a consonant chord.

*Contralto*—same as *alto*.

*Con variazioni*—with variations.

*Direct*—a sign (![direct](images/direct.jpg "direct")) placed at the
end of the last staff on a page, to indicate what the first note on the
next page is going to be. This sign is now practically obsolete.[Pg 97]

*Dirge*—a funeral chant. The dirge is named from the first word of a
chant used in the "office for the dead," which begins—*Dirige Domine,
Deus meus, in conspectu tuo viam meam* (Direct, O Lord, My God, my way
in Thy sight).

*Discord*—an ugly, unharmonious combination of tones.

*Dissonance*—a harmonic combination of tones giving rise to the feeling
of incompleteness or unrest, and therefore requiring resolution to some
other combination which has an agreeable or final feeling. (cf.
consonance.) The diminished triad C—E♭—G♭ is an example of a dissonant
chord.

*Divisi*—divided. An indication showing that the first violins, or the
sopranos, or any other body of performers ordinarily sounding in unison
are now to divide into two or more parts.

*Duet*—a composition for two performers. (From the It. word *due*—two.)

*École*—a school or style of composition or performance.

*Etude*—a study. Also an instrumental composition in the style of a
study, but intended for artistic performance.

*Euphony*—agreeable tone combinations; the opposite of cacophony. (From
the Greek word meaning *well-sounding*.)

*Facile*—easy.

*Fanfare*—a trumpet call.

*Fantasia*—An instrumental composition not based on any regular form.

*Fiasco*—a complete failure or breakdown.

This use of the word *fiasco* (which means in Italian a flask, or
bottle) is said to have reference to the bursting of a bottle, the
complete ruin of the bottle being compared with the complete failure of
a performance.

*Gamut*—all the tones of a scale.

*Glissando*—playing a scale on the keyboard by drawing the finger along
over the keys, thus depressing them in very rapid succession. The word
is derived from the French word *glisser*—to glide.

*Harpsichord*—one of the immediate predecessors of the piano.

*Humoresque*—a capricious, fantastic composition. (Cf. *fantasia*.)

*Idyl*—a short, romantic piece of music in simple and unaffected style.

*In alt*—pitches in the first octave above the treble staff. Thus
*e.g.*, "C in alt" is the C represented by the second added line above
the treble staff.

*In altissimo*—pitches in the octave above the *alt* octave.

*Instrumentation*—see *orchestration*.

*Interlude*—a short movement between two larger movements.

*Loco*—place; *i.e.*, play as written. (See [p. 15](#Page_15), [Sec.
46](#SEC_46).)

*Lunga trillo*—a long trill.

* * * * *

[Pg 98]

CHAPTER XX
----------

Miscellaneous Terms (*Continued*)
---------------------------------

*Lyric*—a short, song-like poem of simple character. Also applied to
instrumental pieces of like character.

*Maggiore*—major.

*Marcato il canto*—the melody well marked; *i.e.*, subdue the
accompaniment so that the melody may stand out strongly.

*Melos*—melody. This word *melos* is also applied to the peculiar style
of vocal solo found in Wagner's music dramas. See *recitative* ([p.
75](#Page_75), [Sec. 170](#SEC_170)).

*Mellifluous*—pleasing; pleasant sounding.

*Menuetto, menuet*—same as *minuet*. (See [p. 68](#Page_68), [Sec.
151](#SEC_151).)

*Mezzo soprano*—a woman's voice of soprano quality, but of somewhat
lower compass than the soprano voice. Range approximately b to g''.

*Minore*—minor.

*Nocturne* (sometimes spelled *nocturn*, *notturna*, *nokturne*, etc.)—a
night piece; a quiet, melodious, somewhat sentimental composition,
usually for piano solo.

*Nuance*—delicate shading; subtle variations in tempo and dynamics which
make the rendition of music more expressive.

*Obbligato* (sometimes incorrectly spelled *obligato*)—an accessory
melody accompanying harmonized music, (usually vocal music).

The word *obbligato* (It. *bound*, or *obliged*) refers to the fact that
this is usually a melody of independent value, so important that it
cannot be omitted in a complete performance.

*Offertory* (sometimes spelled *offertoire*, or *offertorium*)—a piece
of music played or sung during the taking up of the offering in the
church service. The word is often applied by composers to any short,
simple piece of music (usually for organ) that is suitable for the above
purpose.

*Opus*—work; used by composers to designate the order in which their
compositions were written, as *e.g.*, Beethoven, Op. 2, No. 1.

*Orchestration*—the art of writing for the orchestra, this implying an
intimate knowledge of the range, quality, and possibilities of all the
orchestral instruments.

*Ossia*—or else; used most often to call the attention of the performer
to a simpler passage that may be substituted for the original one by a
player whose skill is not equal to the task he is attempting to perform.

*Overture*—(from *overt*—open)—an instrumental prelude to an opera or
oratorio. The older *overtures* were independent compositions and bore
no particular relation to the work which was to follow, but in modern
music (cf. Wagner, Strauss, etc.), the *overture* introduces the
principal themes that are to occur in the work itself, and the
introduction thus becomes an integral part of the work as a whole. The
word *overture* is sometimes applied to independent orchestral
compositions that have no connection with vocal works, as the *Hebrides
Overture* by Mendelssohn.[Pg 99]

*Pizzicato*—plucked. A term found in music for stringed instruments, and
indicating that for the moment the bow is not to be used, the tone being
secured by *plucking* the string.

*Polacca*—a Polish dance in three-quarter measure.

*Polonaise*—same as *polacca*.

*Postlude*—(lit. after-play)—an organ composition to be played at the
close of a church service.

*Prelude*—(lit. before-play)—an instrumental composition to be played at
the beginning of a church service, or before some larger work (opera,
etc.). The term is also applied to independent piano compositions of
somewhat indefinite form. (Cf. *preludes* by Chopin, Rachmaninoff, etc.)

*Prière*—a prayer; a term often applied (especially by French composers)
to a quiet, devotional composition for organ.

*Quintole, quintuplet*—a group of five notes to be performed in the time
ordinarily given to four notes of the same value. There is only one
accent in the group, this occurring of course on the first of the five
tones.

*Religioso, religiosamente*—in a devotional style.

*Requiem*—the mass for the dead in the Roman Catholic service. It is so
called from its first word *requiem* which means *rest*. (See [p.
77](#Page_77), [Sec. 165](#SEC_165).)

*Rhapsody*—an irregular instrumental composition of the nature of an
improvisation. A term first applied by Liszt to a series of piano pieces
based on gypsy themes.

*Ribattuta*—a device in instrumental music whereby a two-note phrase is
gradually accelerated, even to the extent of becoming a trill. (See
[Appendix E](#APPENDIX_E), p. 150, for an example.)

*Ritornello, ritornelle*—a short instrumental prelude, interlude, or
postlude, in a vocal composition, as *e.g.*, in an operatic aria or
chorus.

*Schottische*—a dance in two-quarter measure, something like the
*polka*.

*Sec, secco*—dry, unornamented: applied to a style of opera recitative
(see [p. 75](#Page_75), [Sec. 170](#SEC_170)), and also to some
particular chord in an instrumental composition which is to be sounded
and almost instantly dropped.

*Score*—a term used in two senses:

​1. To designate some particular point to which teacher or conductor
wishes to call attention; as *e.g.*, "Begin with the *lower score*,
third measure." The word *brace* is also frequently used in this sense.

​2. To refer to all the parts of a composition that are to be performed
simultaneously, when they have been assembled on a single page for use
by a chorus or orchestral conductor. The term *vocal score* usually
means all chorus parts together with an accompaniment arranged for piano
or organ, while the terms *full score* and *orchestral score* refer to a
complete assemblage of *all parts*, each being printed on a separate
staff, but all staffs being braced and barred together.

*Senza replica, senza* *repetizione*—without repetition; a term used in
connection with such indications as *D.C.*, *D.S.*, etc., which often
call for the repetition of some large division of a composition, the
term *senza replica* indicating that the smaller repeats included within
the larger division are not to be observed the second time.

*Serenade, serenata*—an evening song.

*Sextet*—a composition for six voices or instruments.[Pg 100]

*Sextuplet*—a group of six notes to be performed in the time ordinarily
given to four of the same value. The sextuplet differs from a pair of
*triplets* in having but one accent.

*Simile, similiter*—the same; indicating that the same general effect is
to be continued.

*Solfeggio, solfège*—a vocal exercise sung either on simple vowels or on
arbitrary syllables containing these simple vowel sounds. Its purpose is
to develop tone quality and flexibility. These terms are also often
applied to classes in sight-singing which use the sol-fa syllables.

*Sopra*—above.

*Soprano*—the highest female voice. Range approximately b—c'''.

*Sostenuto*—sustained or connected; the opposite of *staccato*.

*Sotto*—under. *E.g.*, *sotto voce*—under the voice, *i.e.*, with
subdued tone.

*Solmization*—sight-singing by syllable.

*Staccato*—detached; the opposite of *legato*.

*Subito*—suddenly.

*Tenor*—the highest male voice. Range approximately d—c''.

*Tenuto*—(from *teneo*, to hold)—a direction signifying that the tones
are to be prolonged to the full value indicated by the notes.

*Toccata*—a brilliant composition for piano or organ, usually
characterized by much rapid staccato playing.

*Triplet*—a group of three tones, to be performed in the time ordinarily
given to two of the same value. The first tone of the triplet is always
slightly accented.

*Tutti*—(derived from *totus*, *toti*, Latin—all)—a direction signifying
that all performers are to take part. Also used occasionally to refer to
a passage where all performers do take part.

* * * * *

[Pg 101]

APPENDIX A
----------

The History of Music Notation
-----------------------------

Many conflicting statements have been made regarding the history and
development of music writing, and the student who is seeking light on
this subject is often at a loss to determine what actually did happen in
the rise of our modern system of writing music. We have one writer for
example asserting that staff notation was begun by drawing a single red
line across the page, this line representing the pitch *f* (fourth line,
bass staff), the *neumae* (the predecessors of our modern *notes*)
standing either for this pitch *f*, or for a higher or lower pitch,
according to their position *on* the line, or *above* or *below* it.
"Another line," continues this writer, "this time of yellow color, was
soon added above the red one, and this line was to represent c' (middle
C). Soon the colors of these lines were omitted and the *letters* F and
C were placed at the beginning of each of them. From this arose our F
and C clefs, which preceded the G clef by some
centuries."[[37]](#Footnote_37_37)

Another writer[[38]](#Footnote_38_38) gives a somewhat different
explanation, stating that the staff system with the use of clefs came
about through writing a letter (C or F) in the margin of the manuscript
and drawing a line from this letter to the neume which was to represent
the tone for which this particular letter stood.

A third writer[[39]](#Footnote_39_39) asserts that because the
alphabetical notation was not suitable for recording melodies because of
its[Pg 102] inconvenience in sight-singing "points were placed at
definite distances above the words and above and below one another." "In
this system ... everything depended on the accuracy with which the
points were interspersed, and the scribes, as a guide to the eye, began
to scratch a straight line across the page to indicate the position of
one particular scale degree from which all the others could be shown by
the relative distances of their points. But this was not found
sufficiently definite and the scratched line was therefore colored red
and a second line was added, colored yellow, indicating the interval of
a fifth above the first."

It will be noted that all three writers agree that a certain thing
happened, but as in the case of the four Gospels in the New Testament,
not all the writers agree on details and it is difficult to determine
which account is most nearly accurate in detail as well as in general
statement. Communication was much slower a thousand years ago than now
and ideas about new methods of doing things did not spread rapidly,
consequently it is entirely possible that various men or groups of men
in various places worked out a system of notation differing somewhat in
details of origin and development but alike in final result. The point
is that the development of musical knowledge (rise of part-writing,
increased interest in instrumental music, etc.), demanded a more exact
system of notation than had previously existed, just as the development
of science in the nineteenth century necessitated a more accurate
scientific nomenclature, and in both cases the need gave rise to the
result as we have it to-day.

Out of the chaos of conflicting statements regarding the development of
music notation, the student may glean an outline-knowledge of three
fairly distinct periods or stages, each of these stages being intimately
bound up with the development of *music* itself in that period. These
three stages are:[Pg 103]

​(1) The Greek system, which used the letters of the alphabet for
representing fixed pitches.

​(2) The period of the neumae.

​(3) The period of staff notation.

Of the Greek system little is known beyond the fact that the letters of
the alphabet were used to represent pitches. This method was probably
accurate enough, but it was cumbersome, and did not afford any means of
writing "measured music" nor did it give the eye any opportunity of
grasping the general outline of the melody in its progression upward and
downward, as staff notation does. The Greek system seems to have been
abandoned at some time preceding the fifth century. At any rate it was
about this time that certain *accent marks* began to be written above
the text of the Latin hymns of the church, these marks serving to
indicate in a general way the progress of the melody. E.g., an upward
stroke of the pen indicated a rise of the melody, a downward stroke a
fall, etc. In the course of two or three centuries these marks were
added to and modified quite considerably, and the system of notation
which thus grew up was called "neume notation," the word *neume*
(sometimes spelled *neuma*, or *pneuma*) being of Greek origin and
meaning a *nod* or *sign*.

This system of neumes was in some ways a retrogression from the Greek
letter system, for the neumes indicated neither definite pitches nor
definite tone-lengths. But it had this advantage over the Greek system,
that the position of the signs on the page indicated graphically to the
eye the general direction of the melody, as well as giving at least a
hint concerning the relative highness or lowness of each individual tone
(the so-called *diastematic system*), and this was a great aid to the
eye in singing, just as the relative highness and lowness of notes on
the modern staff is of great value in reading music at the present time.
Thus although the neumae did not enable one to sing a new melody at
sight as our[Pg 104] modern staff notation does, yet they served very
well to recall to the eye the general outline of a melody previously
learned by ear and therefore enabled the singer (the system was used for
vocal music only) to differentiate between that particular melody and
the dozens of others which he probably knew. Neume notation was used
mostly in connection with the "plain-song melodies" of the Church, and
since the words of these chants were sung as they would be pronounced in
reading, the deficiency of the neume system in not expressing definite
duration values was not felt. But later on with the rise of so-called
"measured music" (cf. invention of opera, development of independent
instrumental music, etc.), this lack was seen to be one of the chief
disadvantages of the system.

The elements of neume-writing as given by Riemann in his Dictionary of
Music are:

"(1) The signs for a single note: Virga (Virgula) and Punctus (Punctum).
(2) The sign for a rising interval: Pes (Podatus). (3) The sign for a
falling interval: Clinis (Flexa). (4) Some signs for special manners of
performance: Tremula (Bebung), Quilisma (shake), Plica (turn), etc. The
others were either synonyms of the above-named or combinations of
them...."

Since music in the middle ages was always copied by hand, it will
readily be understood that these neumae were not uniform either in shape
or size, and that each writer made use of certain peculiarities of
writing, which, although perfectly intelligible to himself, could not
readily be interpreted by others (cf. writing shorthand). Here then we
observe the greatest weakness of the neume system—its lack of uniformity
and its consequent inability accurately to express musical ideas for
universal interpretation.

Examples of several neumes are given merely in order to give the
beginner a general idea of their appearance.

Virga ![virga](images/virga1.jpg "virga") or
![virga](images/virga2.jpg "virga"). Punctus
![punctus](images/punctus1.jpg "punctus") or
![punctus](images/punctus2.jpg "punctus"). Pes
![pes](images/pes1.jpg "pes") or ![pes](images/pes2.jpg "pes"). Clinis
![clinis](images/clinis1.jpg "clinis") or
![clinis](images/clinis2.jpg "clinis").

[Pg 105]

As music grew more and more complex, and especially as writing in
several parts came into use (cf. rise of organum, descant, and
counterpoint), it became increasingly difficult to express musical ideas
on the basis of the old notation, and numerous attempts were made to
invent a more accurate and usable system. Among these one of the most
interesting was that in which the words of the text were written in the
spaces between long, parallel lines, placing the initial letters of the
words *tone* and *semi-tone* at the beginning of the line to indicate
the scale interval. An example will make this clear.

 

![text notation](images/notation.jpg "text notation")

 

This indicated the precise melodic interval but did not give any idea of
the rhythm, and the natural accents of the text were the only guide the
singer had in this direction, as was the case in neume-notation and in
early staff-notation also. Various other attempts to invent a more
definite notation were made, but all were sporadic, and it was not until
the idea of using the lines (later lines and spaces) to represent
definite pitches, and writing notes of various shapes (derived from the
neumae) to indicate relative duration-values—it was only when this
combination of two elements was devised that any one system began to be
universally used.

Just how the transition from *neume* to *staff* notation was made no one
knows: it was not done in a day nor in a year but was the result of a
gradual process of evolution and improvement. Nor is it probable that
any one man deserves the entire credit for the invention of staff
notation, although this feat is commonly attributed to an Italian monk
named Guido d'Arezzo (approximate dates 995-1050). To this same monk we
are indebted, however, for the invention of the[Pg 106] syllables (UT,
RE, MI, etc.) which (in a somewhat modified form) are so widely used for
sight-singing purposes. (For a more detailed account of the transition
to staff notation, see Grove, op. cit. article *notation*.) It will now
be readily seen that our modern notation is the result of a combination
of two preceding methods (the Greek letters, and the neumes) together
with a new element—the staff, emphasizing the idea that *higher tones*
are written *higher* on the staff than lower ones. The development of
the neumes into notes of various shapes indicating relative time values
and the division of the staff into measures with a definite measure
signature at the beginning are natural developments of the earlier
primitive idea. In the system of "musica mensurabilis" or *measured
music* which was inaugurated a little later, the *virga* (which had
meanwhile developed into a square-headed neume) was adopted as the
*longa* or long note, and the punctus in two of its forms as *breve* and
*semi-breve* (short and half-short). The longa is now extinct, but the
modern form of the breve is still used as the double-whole-note, and the
semi-breve is our modern whole-note.

Red-colored notes were sometimes used to indicate changes in value and
before long outline notes (called *empty notes*) came into use, these
being easier to make than the solid ones. The transition from square-
and diamond-shaped notes to round and oval ones also came about because
of the greater facility with which the latter could be written, and for
the same reason notes of small denomination were later "tied together"
or *stroked*. This latter usage began about 1700 A.D.

It is interesting to find that when "measured music" was finally
inaugurated there were at first but two measure-signatures, viz.—the
circle, standing for three-beat measure (the so-called *perfect
measure*) and the semi-circle (or broken circle) which indicated
two-beat measure. Occasionally three-beat measure was indicated by three
vertical strokes at the[Pg 107] beginning of the melody, while two-beat
measure was shown by two such strokes. Upon the basis of these two
varieties of measure, primitive in conception though they may have been,
has been built nevertheless the whole system now employed, and in the
last analysis all forms of measure now in use will be found to be of
either the two-beat or the three-beat variety. The circle has
disappeared entirely as a measure-sign, but the broken circle still
survives, and from it are derived the familiar signs ![common
time](images/common.jpg "common time") and
![cut-time](images/cuttime.jpg "cut-time"), which are sometimes
erroneously referred to as being the initial letter of our word *common*
(as used in the expression "common time"). The transition from the older
style of measure-signature to the present one seems to have occurred
during the century following the invention of opera, *i.e.*, from about
1600 to about 1700 A.D.

The rest came into use very soon after "measured music" began to be
composed and we soon find rests corresponding with the various
denominations of notes in use, viz.:

 

![old rests](images/oldrests.jpg "old rests")

 

The terms applied to these rests vary in different authorities, but it
will be noted that the *pausa*, *semi-pausa*, and *suspirum* correspond
respectively to the double-whole-rest, whole-rest, and half-rest in use
at present.

The bar and double bar may be developments of the *maxima rest* (as some
writers suggest) but are probably also derived from the practice of
drawing a line vertically through the various parts of a score to show
which notes belonged together, thus facilitating score reading. The bar
may occasionally be found as early as 1500, but was not employed
universally until 1650 or later.

The number of lines used in the staff has varied greatly since the time
of Guido, there having been all the way from[Pg 108] four to fifteen at
various times and in various places, (*four* being the standard number
for a long time). These lines (when there were quite a number in the
staff) were often divided into *groups of four* by *red* lines, which
were not themselves used for notes. These red lines were gradually
omitted and the staff divided into sections by a space, as in modern
usage. The number of lines in each section was changed to five (in some
cases six) for the sake of having a larger available range in each
section.

The clefs at the beginning of the staffs are of course simply altered
forms of the letters F, C, and G, which were written at first by Guido
and others to make the old neume notation more definite.

The staccato sign seems not to have appeared until about the time of
Bach, the legato sign being also invented at about the same time. The
fermata was first used in imitative part-writing to show where each part
was to stop, but with the development of harmonic writing the present
practice was inaugurated. Leger lines came into use in the seventeenth
century.

Sharps and flats were invented because composers found it necessary to
use other tones than those that could be represented by the staff
degrees in their natural condition. The history of their origin and
development is somewhat complicated and cannot be given here, but it
should be noted once more that it was the need of expressing more than
could be expressed by the older symbols that called forth the newer and
more comprehensive method. The use of sharps and flats in key signatures
grew up early in the seventeenth century. In the earlier signatures it
was customary to duplicate sharps or flats on staff degrees having the
same pitch-name, thus: ![sharps and
flats](images/sharpsflats.jpg "sharps and flats"). (The use of the G
clef as here shown did not of course exist at that time.)[Pg 109]

The double-sharp and double-flat became necessary when "equal
temperament" (making possible the use of the complete cycle of keys) was
adopted. This was in the time of Bach (1685-1750).

Signs of expression (relating to tempo and dynamics) date back at least
as far as the year 1000 A.D., but the modern terms used for this purpose
did not appear until some years after the invention of opera, the date
given by C.F.A. Williams in Grove's Dictionary being 1638. These words
and signs of expression were at first used only in connection with
instrumental music, but were gradually applied to vocal music also.

Other systems of notation have been invented from time to time in the
course of the last two or three centuries, but in most cases they have
died with their inventors, and in no case has any such system been
accepted with anything even approaching unanimity. The tonic-sol-fa
system[[40]](#Footnote_40_40) is used quite[Pg 110] extensively in
England for vocal music, but has gained little ground anywhere else and
the chances are that the present system of notation, with possibly
slight additions and modifications, will remain the standard notation
for some time to come in spite of the attacks that are periodically made
upon it on the ground of cumbersomeness, difficulty in teaching
children, etc. The main characteristics of staff notation may be summed
up as follows:

​1. Pitches represented by lines and spaces of a staff, the higher the
line, the higher the pitch represented, signs called clefs at the
beginning of each staff making clear the pitch names of the lines and
spaces.

​2. Duration values shown by *shapes* of notes.

​3. Accents shown by position of notes on the staff with regard to bars,
*i.e.*, the strongest accent always falls just after the bar, and the
beat relatively least accented is found just before the bar.[Pg 111]

​4. Extent and description of beat-groups shown by measure-signs.

​5. Key shown by key signature placed at the beginning of each staff.

​6. Rate of speed, dynamic changes, etc., shown by certain Italian words
(*allegro*, *andante*, etc.), whose meaning is as universally understood
as staff notation itself.

* * * * *

[Pg 112]

APPENDIX B
----------

Musical Instruments
-------------------

​1. Broadly speaking, musical instruments may be divided into two
classes, viz.: (1) those that have a keyboard and are therefore capable
of sounding several tones simultaneously; (2) those that (as a rule)
sound only one tone at a time, as the violin and trumpet. The piano is
of course the most familiar example of the first class, and a brief
description is therefore given.

The *piano* was invented about two hundred years ago by Cristofori
(1651-1731), an Italian. It was an enormous improvement over the types
of keyboard instrument that were in use at that time (clavichord,
harpsichord, spinet, virginal) and has resulted in an entirely different
style of composition. See note on embellishments, [p. 26](#Page_26).

​2. The most characteristic things about the *piano* as contrasted with
its immediate predecessors are: (1) that on it the loudness and softness
of the tone can be regulated by the force with which the keys are struck
(hence the name *pianoforte* meaning literally the *soft-loud*); (2) the
fact that the piano is capable of sustaining tone to a much greater
extent than its predecessors. In other words the tone continues sounding
for some little time after the key is struck, while on the earlier
instruments it stopped almost instantly after being sounded.

The essentials of the piano mechanism are:

​1. Felt hammers controlled by keys, each hammer striking two or three
strings (which are tuned in unison) and immediately rebounding from
these strings, allowing them to vibrate as long as the key[Pg 113] is
held down. The mechanism that allows the hammers to rebound from the
strings and fall into position for another blow is called the
*escapement*.

​2. A damper (made of softer felt) pressing against each string and
preventing it from vibrating until it is wanted.

​3. A keyboard action that controls both hammers and dampers, causing
the damper to leave the string at the same instant that the hammer
strikes it.

​4. A pedal (damper pedal) controlling all of the dampers, so that at
any moment all the strings may be released so as to be free to vibrate.

Other interesting details are:

​1. The strings are stretched over a thin sheet of wood called the
sound-board. This aids greatly in intensifying the tone.

​2. The soft pedal (the one at the left) in an *upright piano* causes
the hammers to move up nearer the strings, and the shorter swing thus
afforded causes a less violent blow and consequently a softer tone. In
the *grand piano* this same pedal shifts the mechanism to one side so
that the hammers strike only one or two of the strings, this resulting
in a softer tone of somewhat modified quality.

These details regarding the mechanism of the piano can easily be
verified by removing the front of any ordinary upright piano and
observing what takes place when the keys are struck or the pedals
depressed.

​3. There are two familiar types of *organ* in use at the present time,
(1) the reed organ, (2) the pipe-organ.

The *reed organ* is very simple in construction, the tone being produced
by the vibration of metal reeds (fixed in little cells), through which
air is forced (or sucked) from the bellows, the latter being usually
worked by the feet of the player.[Pg 114] More power may be secured
either by drawing additional stops, thus throwing on more sets of reeds,
or by opening the knee swells which either throw on more reeds
(sometimes octave couplers) or else open a *swell box* in which some of
the reeds are enclosed, the tone being louder when the box is open than
when closed. More tone may also be secured by pumping harder.

​4. The essential characteristic of the *pipe-organ* is a number of sets
or registers of pipes called *stops*, each set being capable (usually)
of sounding the entire chromatic scale through a range of five or six
octaves. Thus for example when the stop *melodia* is drawn (by pulling
out a stop-knob or tilting a tablet), one set of pipes only, sounds when
the keyboard is played on: but if the stop *flute* is drawn with
*melodia*, two pipes speak every time a key is depressed. Thus if an
organ has forty *speaking stops*, all running through the entire
keyboard, then each time one key is depressed forty pipes will speak,
and if a chord of five tones is played, two hundred pipes will speak.
The object of having so many pipes is not merely to make possible a very
powerful tone, but, rather, to give greater variety of tone-color.

The pipe-organ usually has a pedal keyboard on which the feet of the
performer play a bass part, this part often sounding an octave (or more)
lower than the notes indicate.

An *eight-foot stop* on the organ produces tones of the same pitches as
the piano when corresponding keys are struck: A *four-foot stop* sounds
tones an octave higher and a *two-foot stop* tones two octaves higher. A
*sixteen-foot stop* sounds tones an octave lower than the piano, and a
*thirty-two foot* stop, tones two octaves lower, while some organs have
also a *sixty-four foot* stop which sounds three octaves lower. This
gives the organ an exceedingly wide range, its compass being greater
than that of any other single instrument, and comparable in both range
of pitches and variety of color only with the modern orchestra.[Pg 115]

Modern pipe-organs always have a number of *combination pedals* or
*pistons* (usually both), by means of which the organist is enabled to
throw on a number of stops with one movement. The selection and use of
suitable stops, couplers, combinations, etc., is called *registration*.

​5. The instruments mentioned at the beginning of this appendix as
belonging to the second class are more familiar in connection with
ensemble playing, being commonly associated with either band or
orchestra.

​6. A *band* is a company of musicians all of whom play upon either wind
or percussion instruments, the main body of tone being produced by the
brass and wood-wind divisions.

Sousa's band is usually made up in somewhat the following manner: 4
flutes and piccolos, 12 B♭ clarinets, 1 E♭ clarinet, 1 alto clarinet, 1
bass clarinet, 2 oboes, 2 bassoons, 2 sarrusophones, 4 saxophones, 4
cornets, 2 trumpets, 1 soprano saxhorn (fluegelhorn), 4 French horns, 4
trombones, 2 contra-bass tubas, 4 tubas, 1 snare drum, 1 bass drum, 2
kettle drums, cymbals, triangle, bells, castanets, xylophone, etc.

​7. An *orchestra* is a company of musicians performing upon stringed
instruments as well as upon wind and percussion. It is differentiated
from the band by the fact that the main body of tone is produced by the
strings.

There are *four classes of instruments* in the orchestra, viz.,
*strings*, *wood-wind*, *brass* (*wind*) and *percussion*. In addition
to these four classes, there is the *harp*, which although a stringed
instrument, does not belong in the same group as the other strings
because the manner of producing the tone is altogether different.

​8. In the first group (the *strings*) are found the first and second
violins, viola, violoncello (usually spelled *cello*), and double-bass.
The first and second violins are identical in every way (but play
different parts), while the other members of the family merely represent
larger examples of the same type of instrument.

​9. In the second group (the *wood-wind*) are found the flute, piccolo,
oboe, bassoon, English horn, double-bassoon,[Pg 116] clarinet, and bass
clarinet. The English horn, double-bassoon, bass clarinet, and piccolo
are not called for in the older compositions, hence are not always
present in the orchestra.

​10. In the third group (the *brass choir*) are found the French horn,
(usually referred to as *the horn*), trumpet (sometimes replaced by the
cornet) trombone, and tuba.

​11. The fourth group (*percussion*) consists of kettle drums, bass
drum, cymbals, snare drum, triangle, bells, etc.

​12. In an orchestra of about 100 players the proportion of instruments
is as about as follows, although it varies somewhat according to the
taste of the conductor, the style of composition to be performed, etc.:

18 first violins, 16 second violins, 14 violas, 12 cellos, 10 basses, 1
harp, 3 flutes, 1 piccolo, 3 oboes, 1 English horn, 3 clarinets, 1 bass
clarinet, 3 bassoons, 1 contra (or double) bassoon, 4 horns, 2 trumpets,
3 trombones, 1 tuba, 3 kettle drums, 1 bass drum, 1 snare drum, 1 each
of triangle, cymbals, bells, and other instruments of percussion,
several of which are often manipulated by one performer.

![violin](images/violin.jpg "violin")13. The cuts and brief descriptions
here added will give at least a rudimentary idea of the appearance and
possibilities of the instruments most commonly used in bands and
orchestras. For fuller descriptions and particulars regarding range,
quality, etc., the student is referred to Mason's "The Orchestral
Instruments and What They Do," Lavignac's "Music and Musicians," and to
the various articles which describe each instrument under its own name
in Grove's Dictionary or in any good encyclopaedia. For still fuller
details some work on orchestration will have to be consulted.

​14. The *violin* has four strings, tuned thus ![violin strings g d' a'
e''](images/violintune.jpg "violin strings g d' a' e''"), these making
available a range of about three and one-half octaves (g—c''''). This
range[[41]](#Footnote_41_41) may be extended upward somewhat[Pg 117]
further by means of *harmonics*, these being produced by lightly
touching the string at certain points (while the bow is moving across
it) instead of holding it down against the finger-board. The highest
string of the *violin* (viola and cello also) is often called the
*chanterelle* because it is most often used for playing the melody. The
*violin* ordinarily produces but one tone at a time, but by *stopping*
two strings simultaneously and so drawing the bow as to set both in
vibration, two tones may be produced at the same time, while three and
four tones can be sounded *almost* simultaneously.

![viola](images/viola.jpg "viola")The *mute* (or *sordino*) is a small
clamp made of metal, wood, or ivory, which when clipped to the top of
the bridge causes the vibrations to be transmitted less freely to the
body of the violin, giving rise to a tone modified in quality, and
decreased in power.

For certain special effects the player is directed to pluck the string
(*pizzicato*), this method of playing giving rise to a dry, detached
tone instead of the smooth, flowing one that is so characteristic of the
*violin* as commonly played.

*Violins* in the orchestra are divided into firsts and seconds, the
*first violins* being always seated at the left of the audience and the
*seconds* at the right.

​15. The *viola* has four strings, also tuned in fifths, thus ![viola
strings c g d' a'](images/violatune.jpg "viola strings c g d' a'"). The
*viola* looks exactly like the violin at a little distance, and is
really only a larger sized violin, having a range a fifth lower. Its
tone is not so incisive as that of the violin, being[Pg 118] rather
heavier—"more gloomy," as it is often described. The *viola* is not so
useful as the violin as a solo instrument because it is not capable of
producing so many varieties of color, nevertheless it is invaluable for
certain effects. In orchestral music it is of course one of the most
valuable instruments for filling in the harmony. The *viola* players are
usually seated behind the second violin players in the orchestra.

![cello](images/cello.jpg "cello")16. The *violoncello* or *cello*
(sometimes called *bass viol*) has four strings, tuned thus: ![cello
strings C G d a](images/cellotune.jpg "cello strings C G d a"). Its
range is about three and one-half octaves (from C to e'' or f''), but in
solo work this range is sometimes extended much higher. The *cello* is
much more universally used as a solo instrument than the viola and its
tone is capable of a much greater degree of variation. In the orchestra
it plays the bass of the string quartet (reinforced by the double-bass),
but is also often used for solo passages. *Con sordino* and *pizzicato*
passages occur as often for the *cello* as for the violin.

![double bass](images/doublebass.jpg "double bass")17. The *double bass*
differs from the other members of the string family in that it is tuned
in *fourths* instead of in *fifths*. Its four strings are tuned as
follows ![bass strings EE AA D
G](images/basstune.jpg "bass strings EE AA D G") the entire range of the
instrument being from EE to a. In music written for double-bass the
notes are always printed an octave higher than the tones are to sound:
that is, when the bass-player sees the note ![bass
c](images/bassc.jpg "bass c") he plays ![pedal
C](images/pedalc.jpg "pedal C") this being done to avoid leger lines.
The tone of the *bass* is much heavier and[Pg 119] the instrument itself
is much more clumsy to handle than the other members of the group, hence
it is almost never used as a solo instrument but it is invaluable for
reinforcing the bass part in orchestral music. The mute is rarely used
on the *double-bass*, but the *pizzicato* effect is very common and the
bass pizzicato tone is much fuller and richer than that of any other
stringed instrument.

​18. The *flute* has a range of three octaves. ![flute range c'
c''''](images/fluterange.jpg "flute range c' c''''") It is used in both
solo and orchestral playing as well as in bands. The flute was formerly
always made of wood, but is at present often made of metal.

​19. The *piccolo* is a flute playing an octave higher than the one
described above. The notes are printed as for the flute, but the player
understands that the tone is to sound an octave higher. The *piccolo* is
used widely in band music and quite often in orchestral music also, but
since the tone is so brilliant and penetrating and is incapable of any
great variation, it is not suitable for solo performance.

![oboe](images/oboe.jpg "oboe")![contrabassoon](images/contrabassoon.jpg "contrabassoon")![English
horn](images/enghorn.jpg "English horn")![piccolo](images/piccolo.jpg "piccolo")![flute](images/flute.jpg "flute")![bassoon](images/bassoon.jpg "bassoon")

[Pg 121]

​20. The next four instruments to be described (*oboe*, *bassoon*,
*English horn*, and *contra bassoon*) are often referred to as the *oboe
family* since the principle of tone production and general manipulation
is the same in all four. The tone in these instruments is produced by
the vibration of two very thin pieces of cane, which are called together
a *double-reed*.

![bass
clarinet](images/bassclarinet.jpg "bass clarinet")![clarinet](images/clarinet.jpg "clarinet")The
*oboe* is especially valuable in the orchestra as a solo instrument, and
its thin, nasal tones are suggestive of rustic, pastoral simplicity,
both *oboe* and *English horn* being often used by orchestral composers
in passages intended to express the idea of rural out-of-door life. The
*English horn* is also often used in passages where the idea of
melancholy and suffering is to be conveyed to the audience. In a
military band the oboe corresponds to the first violin of the orchestra.

The *bassoon* and *contra-bassoon* are used mostly to provide a bass
part for the harmony of the wood-wind group, but they are also sometimes
employed (especially the *bassoon*) to depict comic or grotesque
effects.

​21. The next two types of instruments to be described (*clarinet* and
*saxophone*) are alike in that the tone is produced by the vibration of
a *single* strip of cane (called *single reed*) which is held against
the lower lip of the player. The *clarinet* and *bass clarinet* are made
of wood and are used in both bands and orchestras, but the *saxophone*
is usually made of metal, and, the tone being more[Pg 122] strident and
penetrating, the instrument is ordinarily used only in combination with
other wind instruments, *i.e.*, in bands.

Since the fingering of the *clarinet* is excessively difficult the
performer can play in only certain keys on the same instrument, hence to
play in different keys *clarinets* in several keys must be provided,
there being usually three in all. The music is written as though it were
to be played in the key of C, but the tones produced are actually in
other keys. For this reason the *clarinet* is called a *transposing
instrument*. The range of the *clarinet* is the greatest possessed by
any of the wind instruments, that of the clarinet in C being from
![e](images/lowe.jpg "e") to ![g'''](images/g3.jpg "g'''").

![saxophones](images/saxes.jpg "saxophones")

[Pg 123]

![sarrusophone](images/sarrusophone.jpg "sarrusophone")The
*sarrusophone* is an instrument with a double-reed. It is made of brass
and exists in several sizes, the only one ever used in the orchestra
being the double-bass *sarrusophone*, which has approximately the same
range as the double-bassoon and is sometimes (but rarely) made use of in
the orchestra instead of the latter instrument. The tone of the
*sarrusophone* is something like that of the bassoon.

![French horn](images/frenchhorn.jpg "French horn")22. The *French horn*
(often called *valve horn* or simply *horn*) really consists of a long
tube (about 16 feet) which is bent into circular form for convenience in
handling. Its range is from ![BB](images/doublepedalb.jpg "BB") to
![f''](images/highf.jpg "f''"). In the orchestra *French horns* are used
in pairs, two of the players taking the higher tones, and two the lower.
The tone is intensely mellow but incapable of any extensive[Pg 124]
variation, but in spite of this lack of variety the tone itself is so
wonderfully beautiful that the instrument is one of the most useful in
the orchestra both in solo passages and to fill in the harmony. The
*horn* (as well as the trumpet and trombone) differs from most of the
wood-wind instruments in that its mouthpiece contains no reed, the lips
of the player constituting the vibrating body as they are stretched
across the mouthpiece and air is forced against them. The *horn* is used
in bands as well as in orchestras.

​23. The range of the *trumpet* is ![trumpet range g
b''](images/trumpetrange.jpg "trumpet range g b''"), the typical tone
being brilliant and ringing. It is used in both band and orchestra,
playing the highest parts assigned to the brass choir. The *trumpet* is
often replaced in both band and orchestra by its less refined cousin the
*cornet* because of the ease with which the latter can be played as
compared with the trumpet, and the larger number of players that are
available in consequence of this ease of execution.

![trumpet](images/trumpet.jpg "trumpet")

![cornet](images/cornet.jpg "cornet")24. The *cornet* looks something
like the trumpet, but is not so slim and graceful in appearance. Its
tube is only four and one-half feet long, as compared with a length of
about eight feet in the trumpet, and sixteen feet in the French horn.

The range of the *cornet* in B♭ is from ![e](images/lowe.jpg "e") to
![b-flat''](images/highbflat.jpg "b-flat''"). The tone is somewhat
commonplace as compared with the[Pg 125] trumpet, but because of its
great agility in the rendition of trills, repeated tones, etc., it is
universally used in all sorts of combinations, even (as noted above)
taking the place of the trumpet in many small orchestras.

![trombone](images/trombone.jpg "trombone")25. The pitch sounded by the
*trombone* is altered by lengthening or shortening the tube of which the
instrument is constructed, this being possible because the lower part
slides into the upper and can be pulled out to increase the total length
of the tube through which the air passes. There are usually three
*trombones* in the orchestra, each playing a separate part, and the
combination of this trio (with the *tuba* reinforcing the bass part) is
majestic and thrilling, being powerful enough to dominate the entire
orchestra in *Fortissimo* passages. But the *trombones* are useful in
soft passages also, and their tone when playing pianissimo is rich,
serene, and sonorous.

![tuba](images/tuba.jpg "tuba")26. The *bass tuba* is a member of the
saxhorn family[[42]](#Footnote_42_42) and[Pg 126] supplies the lowest
part of the brass choir, as the double-bass does in the string choir. It
is used in both orchestra and band, being often supported in the larger
bands by a still lower-toned member of the same family—the *contra-bass
tuba*. The range of the *tuba* is from ![double pedal
G](images/doublepedalg.jpg "double pedal G") to
![g'](images/g1.jpg "g'").

​27. The *kettle-drum* is the most important member of the percussion
family and is always used either in pairs or in threes. The size of
these instruments varies somewhat with the make, but when two drums are
used the diameter is approximately that given under the illustration.
The range of a pair of *drums* is *one octave* ![F
f](images/drumrange.jpg "F f") and when but two drums are used the
larger one takes the tones from F to about C of this range, and the
smaller takes those[Pg 127] from about B♭ to F. The most common usage is
to tune one drum to the *tonic*, and the other to *the dominant* of the
key in which the composition is written. The pitch of the *kettle-drum*
can be varied by increasing or lessening the tension of the head by
means of thumb-screws which act on a metal ring.

![bass
drum](images/bassdrum.jpg "bass drum")![cymbals](images/cymbals.jpg "cymbals")

![kettle drums](images/kettle.jpg "kettle drums")

[Pg 128]

The other important members of the percussion family are shown on this
and the following page, their use being so obvious as to require no
detailed explanation.

![tambourine](images/tambourine.jpg "tambourine")

![bells](images/bells.jpg "bells")

[Pg 129]

![side
drum](images/sidedrum.jpg "side drum")![triangle](images/triangle.jpg "triangle")

![harp](images/harp.jpg "harp")28. The *harp* is one of the oldest of
instruments (dating back over 6000 years), but it is only in
comparatively recent years that it has been used in the symphony
orchestra. Its range is from ![double pedal
C-flat](images/doublepedalcflat.jpg "double pedal C-flat") to
![f-flat''''](images/fflat4.jpg "f-flat''''").

The modern *double-action harp* has forty-six strings, which are tuned
in half-steps and whole-steps so as to sound the scale of C♭ major. It
has a series of seven pedals around its base, each pedal having two
*notches* below it, into either of which the pedal may be lowered and
held fast. The first pedal shortens the F♭ string so that it now sounds
F, (giving the key of G♭); the second one[Pg 130] shortens the C♭ string
so that it sounds C (giving the key of D♭); the third pedal shortens the
G♭ string so that it sounds G (giving the key of A♭); the fourth changes
D♭ to D (giving the key of E♭), and so on until, when all the pedals are
fixed in their first notches, the scale of C is sounded instead of C♭ as
was the case before any of the pedals were depressed. But if the first
pedal is now pushed down into the second notch the original F♭ string is
still further shortened and now sounds the pitch F♯ (giving us the key
of G), and if all the other pedals are likewise successively lowered to
the second notch we get in turn all the *sharp keys*—D, A, E, B, F♯ and
C♯, the last-named key being obtained as the result of having all the
pedals fixed in their second notches, thus making all the tones of the
original C♭ scale a whole-step higher so that they now sound the C♯
scale.

Chords of not more than four tones for each hand may be played
simultaneously on the harp, but arpeggio and scale passages are the
rule, and are more successful than simultaneous chords. The notation of
harp music is essentially like that of piano music.

* * * * *

[Pg 131]

APPENDIX C
----------

Acoustics
---------

Note:—It is usually taken for granted that the student of music is
familiar with the significance of such terms as *over-tone*, *equal
temperament*, etc., and with principles such as that relating to the
relation between vibration rates and pitches: the writer has in his own
experience found, however, that most students are not at all familiar
with such data, and this appendix is therefore added in the hope that a
few facts at least regarding the laws of sound may be brought to the
attention of some who would otherwise remain in entire ignorance of the
subject.

​1. *Acoustics* is the science which deals with sound and the laws of
its production and transmission. Since all sound is caused by vibration,
*acoustics* may be defined as the science which treats of the phenomena
of sound-producing vibration.

​2. All sound (as stated above) is produced by vibration of some sort:
strike a tuning-fork against the top of a table and *see* the vibrations
which cause the tone, or, if the fork is a small one and the vibrations
cannot be seen, hold it against the edge of a sheet of paper and hear
the blows it strikes; or, watch one of the lowest strings of the piano
after striking the key a sharp blow; or, look closely at the heavier
strings of the violin (or better still, the cello) and watch them
oscillate rapidly to and fro as the bow moves across them.

The vibrating body may be a string, a thin piece of wood, a piece of
metal, a membrane (cf. drum), the lips (cf. playing the cornet), the
vocal cords, etc. Often it is a column of air whose vibrations give rise
to the tone, the reed or other medium merely serving to set the air in
vibration.

​3. Sound is *transmitted* through the air in somewhat this fashion: the
vibrating body (a string for example) strikes the air-particles in its
immediate vicinity, and they, being in con[Pg 132]tact with other such
air-particles, strike these others, the latter in turn striking yet
others, and so on, both a forward and backward movement being set up
(oscillation). These particles lie so close together that no movement at
all can be detected, and it is only when the disturbance finally reaches
the air-particles that are in contact with the ear-drum that any effect
is evident.

This phenomenon of sound-transmission may perhaps be made more clear by
the old illustration of a series of eight billiard balls in a row on a
table: if the first ball is tapped lightly, striking gently against ball
number 2, the latter (as well as numbers 3, 4, 5, 6, and 7) will not
apparently move at all, but ball number 8 at the other end will roll
away. The air-particles act upon each other in much this same fashion,
the difference being that when they are set in motion by a vibrating
body a complete vibration backward and forward causes a similar
*backward and forward* movement of the particles (oscillation) instead
of simply a *forward jerk* as in the case of the billiard balls.

Another way of describing the same process is this: the vibration of
some body produces waves in the air (cf. waves in the ocean, which carry
water forward but do not themselves move on continuously), these waves
spread out spherically (i.e. in all directions) and finally reach the
ear, where they set the ear-drum in vibration, thus sending certain
sound-stimuli to the nerves of hearing in the inner ear, and thus to the
brain.

An important thing to be noted in connection with sound-transmission is
that sound will not travel in a vacuum: some kind of a medium is
essential for its transmission. This medium may be air, water, a bar of
iron or steel, the earth, etc.

​4. The *rate* at which sound travels through the air is about 1100 feet
per second, the rapidity varying somewhat with fluctuations in
temperature and humidity. In water the rate is much higher than in air
(about four times as great)[Pg 133] while the velocity of sound through
other mediums (as *e.g.*, steel) is sometimes as much as sixteen times
as great as through air.

​5. Sound, like light, may be *intensified* by a suitable reflecting
surface directly back of the vibrating body (cf. sounding board); it may
also be reflected by some surface at a distance from its source in such
a way that at a certain point (the focus) the sound may be very clearly
heard, but at other places, even those *nearer* the source of sound, it
can scarcely be heard at all. If there is such a surface in an
auditorium (as often occurs) there will be a certain point where
everything can be heard very easily, but in the rest of the room it may
be very difficult to understand what is being said or sung.

*Echoes* are caused by sound-reflection, the distance of the reflecting
surface from the vibrating body determining the number of syllables that
will be echoed.

The *acoustics* of an auditorium (*i.e.*, its hearing properties) depend
upon the position and nature of the reflecting surfaces and also upon
the length of time a sound persists after the vibrating body has
stopped. If it persists longer than 2-1/4 or 2-1/3 seconds the room will
not be suitable for musical performances because of the mixture of
persisting tones with following ones, this causing a blurred effect
somewhat like that obtained by playing a series of unrelated chords on
the piano while the damper-pedal is held down. The duration of the
reverberation depends upon the size and height of the room, material of
floor and walls, furniture, size of audience, etc.

​6. Sound may be classified roughly into *tones* and *noises* although
the line of cleavage is not always sharply drawn. If I throw stones at
the side of a barn, sounds are produced, but they are caused by
irregular vibrations of an irregularly constructed surface and are
referred to as *noise*. But if I tap the head of a kettle-drum, a
regular series of vibrations is set up and the resulting sound is
referred to as *tone*. In general the[Pg 134] material of music consists
of tones, but for special effects certain noises are also utilized (cf.
castanets, etc.).

​7. Musical tones have three properties, viz.:

​1. Pitch.

​2. Intensity.

​3. Quality (timbre).

By *pitch* is meant the highness or lowness of tone. It depends upon
rate of vibration. If a body vibrates only 8 or 10 times per second no
tone is heard at all: but if it vibrates regularly at the rate of 16 or
18 per second a tone of very low pitch is heard. If it vibrates at the
rate of 24 the pitch is higher, at 30 higher still, at 200 yet higher,
and when a rate of about 38,000 per second has been reached the pitch is
so high that most ears cannot perceive it at all. The highest tone that
can ordinarily be heard is the E♭ four octaves higher than the highest
E♭ of the piano. The entire range of sound humanly audible is therefore
about eleven octaves (rates 16-38,000), but only about *eight* of these
octaves are utilized for musical purposes. The tones of the piano (with
a range of 7-1/3 octaves) are produced by vibration rates approximately
between 27 and 4224. In the orchestra the range is slightly more
extended, the rates being from 33 to 4752.

Certain interesting facts regarding the relation between vibration-rates
and pitches have been worked out: it has been discovered for instance
that if the number of vibrations is doubled, the pitch of the resulting
tone is an octave higher; *i.e.*, if a string vibrating at the rate of
261 per second gives rise to the pitch c', then a string one-half as
long and vibrating twice as rapidly (522) will give rise to the pitch
c'', *i.e.*, an octave higher than c'. In the same way it has been found
that if the rate is multiplied by 5/4 the pitch of the tone will be a
*major third* higher; if multiplied by 3/2, a *perfect fifth* higher,
etc. These laws are often stated thus: the ratio of the octave to the
fundamental is as two is to one; that of the major third as five is
to[Pg 135] four; that of the perfect fifth as three is to two, and so on
through the entire series of pitches embraced within the octave, the
*ratio* being of course the same for all octaves.

​9. The *intensity* (loudness or softness) of tones depends upon the
amplitude (width) of the vibrations, a louder tone being the result of
vibrations of greater amplitude, and vice versa. This may be verified by
plucking a long string (on cello or double-bass) and noting that when
plucked gently vibrations of small amplitude are set up, while a
vigorous pluck results in much wider vibrations, and, consequently, in a
louder tone. It should be noted that the *pitch* of the tone is not
affected by the change in amplitude of vibration.

The intensity of tones varies with the medium conveying them, being
usually louder at night because the air is then more elastic. Tone
intensity is also affected by *sympathetic vibrations* set up in other
bodies. If two strings of the same length are stretched side by side and
one set in vibration so as to produce tone the other will soon begin to
vibrate also and the combined tone will be louder than if only one
string produced it. This phenomenon is the basis of what is known as
resonance (cf. body of violin, resonance cavities of nose and mouth,
sounding board of piano, etc.).

​10. *Quality* depends upon the shape (or form) of the vibrations which
give rise to the tone. A series of simple vibrations will cause a simple
(or colorless) tone, while complex vibrations (giving rise to overtones
of various kinds and in a variety of proportions) cause more
individualistic peculiarities of quality. Quality is affected also by
the shape and size of the resonance body. (Cf. last part of [sec.
9](#SEC_9A) above.)

​11. Practically every musical tone really consists of a combination of
several tones sounding simultaneously, the combined effect upon the ear
giving the impression of a single tone. The most important tone of the
series is the *fundamental*, which dominates the combination and gives
the pitch,[Pg 136] but this fundamental is practically always combined
with a greater or less number of faint and elusive attending tones
called *overtones* or *harmonics*. The first of these overtones is the
octave above the fundamental; the second is the fifth above this octave;
the third, two octaves above the fundamental, and so on through the
series as shown in the figure below. The presence of these *overtones*
is accounted for by the fact that the string (or other vibrating body)
does not merely vibrate in its entirety but has in addition to the
principal oscillation a number of sectional movements also. Thus it is
easily proved that a string vibrates in halves, thirds, etc., in
addition to the principal vibration of the entire string, and it is the
vibration of these halves, thirds, etc., which gives rise to the
*harmonics*, or *upper partials* as they are often called. The figure
shows *Great C* and its first eight overtones. A similar series might be
worked out from any other fundamental.

 

![Great C](images/greatc.jpg "Great C")

[[Listen]](music/greatc.mid)

 

It will be recalled that in the section ([10](#SEC_10A)) dealing with
*quality* the statement was made that *quality* depends upon the shape
of the vibrations; it should now be noted that it is the form of these
vibrations that determines the nature and proportion of the overtones
and hence the quality. Thus *e.g.*, a tone that has too large a
proportion of the fourth upper partial (*i.e.*, the *third* of the
chord) will be *reedy* and somewhat unpleasant. This is the case with
many voices that are referred to as *nasal*. Too great a proportion of
overtones is what causes certain pianos to sound "tin-panny." The tone
pro[Pg 137]duced by a good tuning-fork is almost entirely free from
overtones: it has therefore no distinctive quality and is said to be a
*simple* tone. The characteristic tone of the oboe on the other hand has
many overtones and is therefore highly individualistic: this enables us
to recognize the tone of the instrument even though we cannot see the
player. Such a tone is said to be *complex*.

​12. The mathematical ratio referred to on [page 134](#Page_134), if
strictly carried out in tuning a keyboard instrument would cause the
half-steps to vary slightly in size, and playing in certain keys
(especially those having a number of sharps or flats in the signature)
would therefore sound out of tune. There would be many other
disadvantages in such a system, notably the inability to modulate freely
to other keys, and since modulation is one of the predominant and most
striking characteristics of modern music, this would constitute a
serious barrier to advances in composition. To obviate these
disadvantages a system of *equal temperament* was invented and has been
in universal use since the time of Bach (1685-1750) who was the first
prominent composer to use it extensively. *Equal temperament* means
simply dividing the octave into twelve equal parts, thus causing all
scales (as played on keyboard instruments at least) to sound exactly
alike.

To show the practicability of equal temperament Bach wrote a series of
48 *preludes and fugues*, two in each major and two in each minor key.
He called the collection "The Well-tempered Clavichord."

​13. Various *standards of pitch* have existed at different times in the
last two centuries, and even now there is no absolute uniformity
although conditions are much better than they were even twenty-five
years ago. Scientists use what is known as the "scientific standard"
(sometimes called the "philosophic standard"), viz., 256 double
vibrations for "middle C." This pitch is not in actual use for musical
purposes, but is retained for theoretical purposes because of its[Pg
138] convenience of computation (being a power of 2). In 1885 a
conference of musicians at Vienna ratified the pitch giving Middle C 261
vibrations, this having been adopted by the French as their official
pitch some 26 years before. In 1891 a convention of piano manufacturers
at Philadelphia adopted this same pitch for the United States, and it
has been in practically universal use ever since. This pitch (giving
Middle C 261 vibrations) is known as "International Pitch."

*Concert pitch* is slightly higher than *International*, the difference
between the two varying somewhat, but being almost always less than
one-half step. This higher pitch is still often used by bands and
sometimes by orchestras to give greater brilliancy to the wind
instruments.

References

Lavignac—Music and Musicians, pp. 1-66.

Broadhouse—The Student's Helmholz.

Helmholtz—Sensations of Tone.

Hamilton—Sound and its Relation to Music.

Note:—For a simple and illuminating treatment of the subject from the
standpoint of the music student, the books by Lavignac and Hamilton are
especially recommended.

* * * * *

[Pg 139]

APPENDIX D
----------

Terminology Reform
------------------

A recent writer[[43]](#Footnote_43_43) on *vocal terminology* makes the
following statement as an introduction to certain remarks advocating a
more definite use of terms relating to tone production by the human
voice:—"The correct use of words is the most potent factor in the
development of the thinker." If this statement has any basis of fact
whatsoever to support it then it must be evident to the merest novice in
musical work that the popular use of many common terms by musicians is
keeping a good many people from clear and logical thought in a field
that needs accurate thinkers very badly! However this may be, it must be
patent to all that our present terminology is in many respects neither
correct nor logical, and the movement inaugurated by the Music Section
of the National Education Association some years ago to secure greater
uniformity in the use and definition of certain expressions should
therefore not only command the respect and commendation, but the active
support of all progressive teachers of music.

Let it be noted at the outset that such reforms as are advocated by the
committee will never come into general use while the rank and file of
teachers throughout the country merely *approve* the reports so
carefully compiled and submitted each year: these reforms will become
effective only as individual teachers make up their minds that the end
to be attained is worth the trouble of being careful to use only
correct[Pg 140] terminology every day for a month, or three months, or a
year—whatever length of time may be necessary in order to get the new
habits fixed in mind and muscle.

The Terminology Committee was appointed by the Department of Music of
the N.E.A. in 1906 and made its first report at Los Angeles in 1907.
Since then the indefatigable chairman of the committee (Mr. Chas. I.
Rice, of Worcester, Mass.) has contributed generously of both time and
strength, and has by his annual reports to the Department set many of us
to thinking along certain new lines, and has caused some of us at any
rate to adopt in our own teaching certain changes of terminology which
have enabled us to make our work more effective.

In his first report Mr. Rice says:

"Any one who has observed the teaching of school music in any
considerable number of places in this country cannot fail to have
remarked the great diversity of statement employed by different teachers
regarding the facts which we are engaged in teaching, and the equal
diversity of terminology used in teaching the symbols by which musicians
seek to record these facts. To the teacher of exact sciences our
picturesque use of the same term to describe two or more entirely
different things never ceases to be a marvel.... Thoughtful men and
women will become impressed with the untruthfulness of certain
statements and little by little change their practice. Others will
follow, influenced by example. The revolutionists will deride us for not
moving faster while the conservatives will be suspicious of any change."

At this meeting in Los Angeles a list of thirteen points was recommended
by the committee and adopted by the Music Department. These points are
given in the N.E.A. Volume of Proceedings for 1907, p. 875.

Since 1907 the committee (consisting of Chas. I. Rice, P.C. Hayden, W.B.
Kinnear, Leo R. Lewis, and Constance[Pg 141] Barlow-Smith) have each
year selected a number of topics for discussion, and have submitted
valuable reports recommending the adoption of certain reforms. Some of
the points recommended have usually been rejected by the Department, but
many of them have been adopted and the reports of the committee have set
many teachers thinking and have made us all more careful in the use and
definition of common terms. A complete list of all points adopted by the
Department since 1907 has been made by Mr. Rice for *School Music*, and
this list is here reprinted from the January, 1913, number of that
magazine.

Terminology Adoptions, 1907-1910

​1. *Tone:* Specific name for a musical sound of definite pitch. Use
neither *sound*, a general term, nor *note*, a term of notation.

​2. *Interval:* The pitch relation between *two* tones. Not properly
applicable to a single tone or scale degree. Example: "Sing the fifth
tone of the scale." Not "sing the fifth interval of the scale."

​3. *Key:* Tones in relation to a tonic. Example: In the key of G. *Not*
in the scale of G. Scales, major and minor are composed of a definite
selection from the many tones of the key, and all scales extend through
at least one octave of pitch. The chromatic scale utilizes all the tones
of a key within the octave.

​4. *Natural:* Not a suitable compound to use in naming pitches. Pitch
names are either *simple*: B, or *compound*: B sharp, B double-sharp, B
flat or B double-flat, and there is no pitch named "B natural." Example:
Pitch B, *not* "B natural."

Note:—L.R.L. thinks that B natural should be the name when the notation
suggests it.

​5. *Step, Half-step:* Terms of interval *measurement*. Avoid *tone*,
*semi-tone* or *half-tone*. Major second and minor second are interval
*names*. Example: How large are the following intervals? (1) Major
second, (2) minor second, (3) augmented prime. Answer: (1) a step, (2) a
half-step, (3) a half-step.

​6. *Chromatic:* A tone of the key which is not a member of its diatonic
scale. (N.B.) An accidental (a notation sign) is not a chromatic sign
*unless* it makes a staff-degree represent a chromatic tone.[Pg 142]

​7. *Major; Minor:* Major and Minor keys having the same signature
should be called relative major and minor. Major and minor keys having
the same tonic, but different signatures, should be called tonic major
and minor. Not "parallel" major or minor in either case.

​8. *Staff:* Five horizontal lines and their spaces. Staff *lines* are
named (numbered) upward in order, first to fifth. *Spaces:* Space below,
first-second-third-fourth-space, and space above[[44]](#Footnote_44_44).
(Six in all.) Additional short lines and their short spaces numbered
outward both ways from the main staff, viz: line below, second space
below. The boundary of the staff is always a space.

​9. *G Clef, F Clef, C Clef:* These clefs when placed upon the staff,
give its degrees their first, or primary pitch meaning. Each makes the
degree it occupies represent a pitch of its respective name. Example:
The G clef makes the second line represent the pitch G. Avoid "*fixes G
on*." The staff with clef in position represents only pitches having
*simple* or *one-word* names, A, B, C, etc.

​10. *Sharps, Flats:* Given a staff with clef in position as in example
above, sharps and flats make staff degrees upon which they are placed
represent pitches a half-step higher or lower. These pitches have
compound or two-word names. Example: The second line stands for the
pitch G (simple name). Sharp the second line and it will stand for the
pitch G sharp. (Compound name.) The third line stands for the pitch B.
(Simple name.) Flat it, and the line will stand for the pitch B flat.
(Compound name.) N.B. These signs do not "*raise*" or "*lower*" notes,
tones, pitches, letters or staff degrees.

​11. *Double-sharp, Double-flat:* Given a staff with three or more
degrees sharped in the signature, double-sharps are used (subject to the
rules governing composition) to make certain of these degrees, already
sharped, represent pitches one half-step higher yet. Similarly, when
three or more degrees are flatted in the signature, double-flats are
used to make certain degrees already flatted, represent pitches one
half-step lower yet. Examples: To represent sharp 2 in the key of B
major, double-sharp the C degree, or (equally good) double-sharp the
third space (G clef). To represent flat 6 in the key of D flat major,
double-flat the B degree, or (equally good) double flat the third line
(G clef). *Do not say*: "Put a double-sharp on 6" or "put a double-sharp
on C," or "*indicate"* a higher or lower pitch "*on*" a sharped or
flatted degree.

​12. *Signature:* Sharps or flats used as signatures affect the staff
de[Pg 143]grees they occupy and all octaves of the same. Example: With
signature of four sharps, the first one affects the fifth line and the
first space; the second, the third space; the third, the space above and
the second line; the fourth, the fourth line and the space below. *Do
not say*: "F and C are sharped," "ti is sharped," "B is flatted," "fa is
flatted." "Sharpened" or "flattened" are undesirable.

​13. *Brace:* The two or more staffs containing parts to be sounded
together; also the vertical line or bracket connecting such staffs.
*Not* "line" or "score." "Staff" is better than "line" for a single
staff, and "score" is used meaning the book containing an entire work,
as "vocal score," "orchestral score," "full score."

​14. *Notes:* Notes are characters designed to represent relative
duration. When placed on staff-degrees they *indicate* pitch. (Note the
difference between "represent" and "indicate.") "Sing what the note
calls for" means, sing a tone of the pitch represented by the staff
degree occupied by the note-head. The answer to the question: "What is
that note?" would be "half-note," "eighth-note" according to the
denomination of the note in question, whether it was on or off the
staff.

​15. *Measure-sign:* 4-4, 2-4, 6-8, are *measure-signs*. Avoid "time
signatures," "meter-signatures," "the fraction," "time-marks." Example:
What is the measure-sign? (C) Ans. A broken circle. What is its meaning?
Ans. Four-quarter measure. (Not four-four time, four-four rhythm,
four-four meter.)

​16. *Note Placing:* Place a quarter note on the fourth line. Not "put a
quarter note on D."

​17. *Beat-Pulse:* A tone or rest occurs on a certain beat or pulse of a
measure. Not on a certain *count*.

​18. *Signature Terminology:* The right hand sharp in the signature is
on the staff degree that represents seven of the major scale. Not
"always on 7 or ti."

​19. *Signature Terminology:* The right hand flat in the signature is on
the staff degree that represents four of the major scale. Not "always on
fa."

​20. *Rote, Note, Syllable:* Singing by rote means that the singer sings
something learned by ear without regard to notes. Singing by note means
that the singer is guided to the correct pitch by visible notes. Singing
by syllable means that the singer sings the tones of a song or part to
the sol-fa syllables instead of to words, neutral vowels or the hum.
"Sing by note" is not correct if the direction means simply to sing
the[Pg 144] sol-fa syllables, whether in sight reading, rote singing, or
memory work. "Sing by syllable" would be correct in each case.

Adoptions of the 1911 Meeting at San Francisco

Arabic numerals, either 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 9, or 12, placed on the staff
directly after the signature and above the third line, show the number
of beats in a measure.

A note, either a quarter or a dotted quarter, placed in parenthesis
under the numeral, represents the length of one beat and is called the
beat-note.

The numeral and the beat-note thus grouped constitute the measure-sign.

Illustrative statements covering proper terminology: the tune "America"
is written in three-quarter measure. The chorus: "How lovely are the
Messengers" is written in two-dotted quarter measure.

The above forms of statement were adopted at Denver in 1909, and are
recommended for general use when speaking of music written with the
conventional measure-signs, etc.

In place of: "two-two time, three-eight time, four-four time," say as
above: "This piece is written in two-half measure, three-eighth measure,
four-quarter measure."

Minor Scales

*Primitive Minor (ascending)*

The minor scale form having minor sixth and minor seventh above tonic to
be called Primitive Minor.

Illustrative examples. A minor: a, b, c, d, e, f, g, a; C minor: c, d, e
flat, f, g, a flat, b flat, c.

*Transcriber's Note:* Above, supplied b flat missing from original.

*Primitive Minor (descending)*

Same pitches in reverse order.

*Harmonic Minor (ascending)*

The minor scale form having minor sixth and major seventh above tonic to
be called Harmonic Minor.

Illustrative examples. A minor: a, b, c, d, e, f, g sharp, a; C minor:
c, d, e flat, f, g, a flat, b, c.

*Harmonic Minor (descending*)

Same pitches in reverse order.[Pg 145]

*Melodic Minor (ascending)*

The minor scale form having major sixth and major seventh above tonic to
be called Melodic Minor.

Illustrative examples. A minor: a, b, c, d, e, f sharp, g sharp, a; C
minor: c, d, e flat, f, g, a, b, c.

*Melodic Minor (descending)*

Same as the Primitive.

Adoptions of the 1912 Meeting at Chicago

*Pulse and Beat*

The Committee finds that the words: Pulse and Beat are in general use as
synonymous terms, meaning one of the succession of throbs or impulses of
which we are conscious when listening to music. Each of these pulses or
beats has an exact point of beginning, a duration, and an exact point of
ending, the latter coincident with the beginning of the next pulse or
beat. When thus used, both words are terms of ear.

*Beat*

One of these words, Beat, is also in universal use, meaning one of a
series of physical motions by means of which a conductor holds his group
of performers to a uniform movement.

When thus used it becomes a term of eye.

The conductor's baton, if it is to be authoritative, cannot wander about
through the whole duration of the pulse but must move quickly to a point
of comparative repose, remaining until just before the arrival of the
next pulse when it again makes a rapid swing, finishing coincidently
with the initial tone (or silence) of the new pulse.

Thus it is practically the end of the conductor's beat that marks the
beginning of the pulse.

The Committee is of opinion that Beat might preferably be used as
indicating the outward sign.

*Beat-Note*

This term "beat-note" is already in use in another important connection
(see Terminology Report, 1911) and the Committee recommends that those
using the above terms shall say: "This note is an on-the-beat note; this
one is an after-the-beat note; this one a before-the-beat note."[Pg 146]

Definitions

*Matters of Ear*

Pulse: The unit of movement in music, one of a series of regularly
recurring throbs or impulses.

Measure: A group of pulses.

Pulse-Group: Two or more tones grouped within the pulse.

*Matters of Eye*

Beat: One of a series of conventional movements made by the conductor.
This might include any unconventional motion which served to mark the
movement of the music, whether made by conductor, performer or auditor.

Beat-Note: A note of the denomination indicated by the measure-sign as
the unit of note-value in a given measure.

*Example*

Given the following measure-signs: 2-4, 2-2, 2-8, quarter, half, or
eighth notes, respectively, are beat-notes.

Beat-Group: A group of notes or notes and rests, of smaller denomination
than the beat-note which represents a full beat from beginning to end
and is equal in value to the beat-note. (A beat-group may begin with a
rest.)

On-the-Beat Note (or rest): Any note (or rest) ranging in value from a
full beat down, which calls for musical action (or inaction)
synchronously with the conductor's beat.

After-the-Beat Note: Any note in a beat-group which indicates that a
tone is to be sounded after the beginning, and before or at the middle
of the pulse.

Before-the-Beat Note: Any note in a beat-group which indicates that a
tone is to be sounded after the middle of the pulse.

To illustrate terminology and to differentiate between Pulse and Beat as
terms, respectively of ear and eye, the following is submitted:

Whenever a brief tone involves the musical idea of syncopation, it may
be regarded as an after-the-pulse tone and the note that calls for it as
an after-the-beat note; when it involves the idea of anticipation or
preparation it may be regarded as a before-the-pulse tone, and the note
that calls for it, as a before-the-beat note.[Pg 147]

*Measure and Meter*

"What is the measure-sign?"

"What is the meter-signature?"

These two words are used synonymously, and one of them is unnecessary.
The Committee recommends that Measure be retained and used. Meter has
its use in connection with hymns.

* * * * *

The author does not find it possible at present to agree with all the
recommendations made in the above report, but the summary is printed in
full for the sake of completeness.

The Music Teacher's National Association has also interested itself
mildly in the subject of terminology reform, and at its meeting in
Washington, D.C., in 1908, Professor Waldo S. Pratt gave his address as
president of the Association on the subject "System and Precision in
Musical Speech." This address interested the members of the Association
to such an extent that Professor Pratt was asked to act as a committee
whose purpose it should be to look into the matter of reforms necessary
in music terminology and report at a later session. In 1910 Professor
Pratt read a report in which he advocated the idea of making some
changes in music nomenclature, but took the ground that the subject is
too comprehensive to be mastered in the short time that can be given to
it by a committee, and that it is therefore impossible to recommend
specific changes. He also took occasion to remark that one difficulty in
the whole matter of terminology is that many terms and expressions are
used *colloquially* and that such use although usually not scientific,
is often not distinctly harmful and is not of sufficient importance to
cause undue excitement on the part of reformers. Quoting from the report
at this point:—"A great deal of confusion is more apparent than real
between *note* and *tone*, between *step* and *degree*, between *key*
and *tonality*. No practical harm is done by speaking of the *first
note* of a piece when really *first tone* would be more[Pg 148]
accurate. To say that a piece is written *in the key of B♭* is more
convenient than to say that it is written in the *tonality of which B♭
is the tonic*. The truth is that some of the niceties of expression upon
which insistence is occasionally laid are merely fussy, not because they
have not some sort of reason, but because they fail to take into account
the practical difference between colloquial or off-hand speech and the
diction of a scientific treatise. This is said without forgetting that
colloquialism always needs watching and that some people form the habit
of being careless or positively uncouth as if it were a mark of high
artistic genius."

Professor Pratt's report is thus seen to be philosophic rather than
constructive, and terminology reform will undoubtedly make more
immediate progress through the efforts of the N.E.A. Committee with its
specific recommendations (even though these are sometimes admittedly
*fussy*) than through the policy of the M.T.N.A. of waiting for some one
to get time to take up the subject in a scholarly way. Nevertheless the
philosophic view is sometimes badly needed, especially when the spirit
of reform becomes too rabid and attaches too great importance to
trifles. A judicious intermingling of the two committees in a series of
joint meetings would undoubtedly result in mutual helpfulness, and
possibly also in a more tangible and convincing statement of principles
than has yet been formulated by either.

* * * * *

[Pg 149]

APPENDIX E
----------

Sonata Op. 31, No. 3 by Beethoven
---------------------------------

Analysis by Arthur E. Heacox,\
 Oberlin Conservatory of Music

 

*Transcriber's Note:* The original book contains only the first movement
of the sonata. Click on the "Enlarge" link below each page image to view
a larger version of that page. To listen to the music, click
[here](music/sonata.mid).

 

First Subject 17 measures, E♭ major, as follows: 8 meas. presentation,
one meas. link, 8 meas. repetition oct. higher. Rhythmic elements are A,
B, C, all presented in first 8 meas.

![Sonata p. 1](images/sonata01sm.jpg "Sonata p. 1")

[[Enlarge page 1]](images/sonata01lg.jpg)

![Sonata p. 2](images/sonata02sm.jpg "Sonata p. 2")

[[Enlarge page 2]](images/sonata02lg.jpg)

![Sonata p. 3](images/sonata03sm.jpg "Sonata p. 3")

[[Enlarge page 3]](images/sonata03lg.jpg)

![Sonata p. 4](images/sonata04sm.jpg "Sonata p. 4")

[[Enlarge page 4]](images/sonata04lg.jpg)

![Sonata p. 5](images/sonata05sm.jpg "Sonata p. 5")

[[Enlarge page 5]](images/sonata05lg.jpg)

![Sonata p. 6](images/sonata06sm.jpg "Sonata p. 6")

[[Enlarge page 6]](images/sonata06lg.jpg)

![Sonata p. 7](images/sonata07sm.jpg "Sonata p. 7")

[[Enlarge page 7]](images/sonata07lg.jpg)

![Sonata p. 8](images/sonata08sm.jpg "Sonata p. 8")

[[Enlarge page 8]](images/sonata08lg.jpg)

![Sonata p. 9](images/sonata09sm.jpg "Sonata p. 9")

[[Enlarge page 9]](images/sonata09lg.jpg)

![Sonata p. 10](images/sonata10sm.jpg "Sonata p. 10")

[[Enlarge page 10]](images/sonata10lg.jpg)

* * * * *

[Pg 159]

INDEX
-----

 

eh = a as in face; ah = a as in far; ch = ch as in chair; final eh = e
as in met.

 

A (*ah*), [95](#Page_95)\
 \
 A battuta (*ah-baht-too'-tah*), [95](#Page_95)\
 \
 A capella (*cah-pel'-lah*), [76](#Page_76)\
 \
 A capriccio (*cah-pritch'-eo*), [54](#Page_54)\
 \
 Accelerando (*aht-cheh-leh-rahn'-do*), [54](#Page_54)\
 \
 Accented tones, [20](#Page_20)\
 \
 Accent marks, [20](#Page_20)\
 \
 Accent in measures, [44](#Page_44)\
 \
 Acciaccatura (*aht-cheea-cah-too'-ra*), [25](#Page_25), [26](#Page_26)\
 \
 Accidentals, [9](#Page_9)\
 \
 Accompagnamento (*ahc-com-pahn-yah-men'-to*), [95](#Page_95)\
 \
 Acoustics (*ah-kow'-stics*), def., [131](#Page_131)\
 of auditoriums, [133](#Page_133)\
 \
 Adagietto (*ah-dah-jee-et'-to*), [50](#Page_50)\
 \
 Adagio (*ah-dah'-jee-o*), [50](#Page_50)\
 \
 À deux mains (*doo-mahng*), [42](#Page_42)\
 \
 Ad libitum, [54](#Page_54)\
 \
 Affrettando (*ahf-fret-tahn'-do*), [54](#Page_54)\
 \
 Agitato (*ah-jee-tah'-to*), [55](#Page_55)\
 \
 Agréments (*ah-greh-mahng*), [22](#Page_22)\
 \
 À la or alla (*ahl'-lah*), [42](#Page_42)\
 \
 Alla breve (*breh'-veh*), [95](#Page_95)\
 \
 Alla marcia (*mar'-chee-ah*), [95](#Page_95)\
 \
 Allargando (*ahl-lahr-gahn'-do*), [53](#Page_53)\
 \
 Alla zingara (*tseen-gah'-rah*), [95](#Page_95)\
 \
 Allegretto (*ahl-leh-gret'-to*), [51](#Page_51)\
 \
 Allegrissimo, [52](#Page_52)\
 \
 Allegro (*ahl-leh'-gro*), [50](#Page_50)\
 \
 Allegro agitato (*ah-jee-tah'-to*), [52](#Page_52)\
 \
 Allegro appassionata (*-ah'-tah*), [52](#Page_52)\
 \
 Allegro assai (*ahs-sah'-ee*), [52](#Page_52)\
 \
 Allegro commodo (*kom-mo'-do*), [52](#Page_52)\
 \
 Allegro con brio (*bree'-o*), [52](#Page_52)\
 \
 Allegro con fuoco (*foo-o'-ko*), [53](#Page_53)\
 \
 Allegro con moto (*mo'-to*), [53](#Page_53)\
 \
 Allegro con spirito (*spee'-ree-to*), [53](#Page_53)\
 \
 Allegro di bravura (*dee brah-voo'-rah*), [53](#Page_53)\
 \
 Allegro di molto (*mohl'-to*), [53](#Page_53)\
 \
 Allegro furioso (*foo-ree-o'-so*), [53](#Page_53)\
 \
 Allegro giusto (*jew-sto*), [53](#Page_53)\
 \
 Allegro ma grazioso (*mah grah-tsi-o'-so*), [53](#Page_53)\
 \
 Allegro (ma) non tanto (*tahn'-to*), [53](#Page_53)\
 \
 Allegro (ma) non troppo (*trop'-po*), [53](#Page_53)\
 \
 Allegro moderato (*mod-e-rah'-to*), [53](#Page_53)\
 \
 Allegro quasi andante (*quah-see ahn-dahn'-teh*), [53](#Page_53)\
 \
 Allegro vivace (*vee-vah'-cheh*), [53](#Page_53)\
 \
 Allemande (*al-mahnd*), [71](#Page_71)\
 \
 All'unisono (*oo-nee-so'-no*), [95](#Page_95)\
 \
 All'ottava (*ot-tah'-vah*), [15](#Page_15)\
 \
 Alt (*ahlt*), [95](#Page_95)\
 \
 Alto (*ahl-to*), [95](#Page_95)\
 \
 A mezza voce (*met'-zah-vo'-cheh*), [42](#Page_42)\
 \
 Amore (*ah-mo'-reh*), [42](#Page_42), [59](#Page_59)\
 \
 Andante (*ahn-dahn'-teh*), [50](#Page_50)\
 \
 Andante affettuoso (*ahf-fet-too-o'-so*), [52](#Page_52)\
 \
 Andante amabile (*ah-mah'-bee-leh*), [52](#Page_52)\
 \
 Andante cantabile (*cahn-tah'-bee-leh*), [52](#Page_52)\
 \
 Andante con moto (*mo'-to*), [52](#Page_52)\
 \
 Andante grazioso (*grah-tsi-o'-so*), [52](#Page_52)\
 \
 Andante maestoso (*mah-es-to'-so*), [52](#Page_52)\
 \
 Andante (ma) non troppo (*mah non trop'-po*), [52](#Page_52)\
 \
 Andante pastorale (*pahs-to-rah'-leh*), [52](#Page_52)\
 \
 [Pg 160]Andante quasi allegro (*quah-see ahl-leh'-gro*),
[52](#Page_52)\
 \
 Andante sostenuto (*sos-teh-noo'-to*), [52](#Page_52)\
 \
 Animando (*ah-nee-mahn'-do*), [55](#Page_55)\
 \
 Animato (*ah-nee-mah'-to*), [55](#Page_55)\
 \
 Animato come sopra (*co-meh so'-prah*), [55](#Page_55)\
 \
 Andantino (*ahn-dahn-tee'-no*), [50](#Page_50)\
 \
 Antecedent, [67](#Page_67)\
 \
 Anthem, [76](#Page_76)\
 \
 Anticipation, [93](#Page_93)\
 \
 Antiphony (*an-tif'-o-ny*), [95](#Page_95)\
 \
 Antithesis (*an-tith'-*), [67](#Page_67)\
 \
 A piacere (*pee-ah-cheh'-reh*), [54](#Page_54)\
 \
 Appoggiatura (*ap-pod-jea-too'-rah*), def., [25](#Page_25)\
 \
 À quatre mains (*kahtr-mahng*), [95](#Page_95)\
 \
 Arabesque, [95](#Page_95)\
 \
 Aria (*ah'-ree-ah*), [79](#Page_79)\
 \
 Arioso (*ah-ree-o'-so*), [95](#Page_95)\
 \
 Arpeggiando (*ar-ped-jee-ahn'-do*), [21](#Page_21)\
 \
 Arpeggiato (*-ah'-to*), [21](#Page_21)\
 \
 Arpeggiento (*-en'-to*), [21](#Page_21)\
 \
 Arpeggio (*ar-ped'-jee-o*), [21](#Page_21)\
 \
 Art-ballad, [80](#Page_80)\
 \
 Assai (*ahs-sah'-ee*), [42](#Page_42)\
 \
 A tempo, [54](#Page_54)\
 \
 A tempo primo (*pree'-mo*), [54](#Page_54)\
 \
 A tempo rubato (*roo-bah'-to*), [54](#Page_54)\
 \
 Attacca (*aht-tah'-kah*), [95](#Page_95)\
 \
 Attacca subito (*soo'-bee-to*), [95](#Page_95)\
 \
 Attacca subito il seguente (*eel seg-wen'-teh*), [95](#Page_95)\
 \
 Attack, [95](#Page_95)\
 \
 \
 Bagpipe, [95](#Page_95)\
 \
 Ballad, [80](#Page_80)\
 \
 Band, [115](#Page_115)\
 \
 Bar, def. and use, [12](#Page_12)\
 double, [12](#Page_12)\
 \
 Barcarole (*bar'-cah-rohl*), [95](#Page_95)\
 \
 Baritone, [95](#Page_95)\
 \
 Bass, [95](#Page_95)\
 \
 Bass clarinet, [121](#Page_121)\
 \
 Basso (*bahs'-so*), [95](#Page_95)\
 \
 Bassoon, [121](#Page_121)\
 \
 Bass staff, [6](#Page_6)\
 \
 Bass tuba, [125](#Page_125)\
 \
 Bass viol, [118](#Page_118)\
 \
 Ben (*behn*), [42](#Page_42)\
 \
 Ben marcato (*mahr-kah'-to*), [42](#Page_42)\
 \
 Berceuse (*behr-soos'*), [95](#Page_95)\
 \
 Binary form, [95](#Page_95)\
 \
 Binary measure, [95](#Page_95)\
 \
 Bis (*bees*), [96](#Page_96)\
 \
 Bolero (*bo-leh'-ro*), [71](#Page_71)\
 \
 Bourrée (*boo-reh'*), [71](#Page_71)\
 \
 Brace, [96](#Page_96)\
 \
 Brass instruments, [116](#Page_116)\
 \
 Brillante (*breel-ahn'-teh*), [55](#Page_55)\
 \
 Broken chord, [96](#Page_96)\
 \
 Broken octave, [96](#Page_96)\
 \
 \
 Cacophony (*kak-of'-o-ny*), [96](#Page_96)\
 \
 Cadence, [89](#Page_89)\
 \
 Cadenza, [96](#Page_96)\
 \
 Calando (*kah-lahn'-do*), [59](#Page_59)\
 \
 Cancel, [3](#Page_3), [8](#Page_8)\
 \
 Cantabile (*kahn-tah'-bee-leh*), [96](#Page_96)\
 \
 Cantando (*kakn-tahn'-do*), [96](#Page_96)\
 \
 Canto (*kahn'-to*), [96](#Page_96)\
 \
 Cantus firmus, [64](#Page_64)\
 \
 Canon, [64](#Page_64)\
 \
 Cantata (*kahn-tah'-tah*), [77](#Page_77)\
 \
 Carol, [96](#Page_96)\
 \
 Catch, [96](#Page_96)\
 \
 C clef [3](#Page_3), [6](#Page_6)\
 \
 Cello (*chel'-lo*), [118](#Page_118)\
 \
 Chaconne (*shah-con'*), [71](#Page_71)\
 \
 Chamber music, [72](#Page_72)\
 \
 Chanterelle (*shong-tah-rel'*), [117](#Page_117)\
 \
 Chinese scale, [27](#Page_27)\
 \
 Choral, [76](#Page_76)\
 \
 Chords def. and lands, [87](#Page_87)\
 inversions of, [88](#Page_88)\
 common, [87](#Page_87)\
 seventh, [89](#Page_89)\
 dominant seventh, [92](#Page_92)\
 \
 Chromatic, [96](#Page_96)\
 \
 Chromatic scale, [38](#Page_38)\
 \
 Clarinet, [121](#Page_121)\
 \
 Classes of instruments in orchestra, [115](#Page_115)\
 \
 Clavichord, [96](#Page_96)\
 \
 Clefs, [3](#Page_3), [5](#Page_5)\
 \
 Close position, [94](#Page_94)\
 \
 Coda, [70](#Page_70)\
 \
 Coi (*co'-ee*), [42](#Page_42)\
 \
 Col, [42](#Page_42)\
 \
 [Pg 161]Colla, [42](#Page_42)\
 \
 Colla parte (*par'-teh*), [96](#Page_96)\
 \
 Colla voce (*vo'-cheh*), [96](#Page_96)\
 \
 Colle, [42](#Page_42)\
 \
 Collo, [42](#Page_42)\
 \
 Coloratura singing, [79](#Page_79), [96](#Page_96)\
 \
 Coll'ottava (*ot-tah'-vah*), [15](#Page_15)\
 \
 Combination pedals, [115](#Page_115)\
 \
 Come (*koh'-meh*), [42](#Page_42)\
 \
 Come primo (*pree'-mo*), [42](#Page_42)\
 \
 Common chords, [87](#Page_87)\
 \
 Compound measure, [45](#Page_45)\
 \
 Compound duple measure, [45](#Page_45)\
 \
 Con, [42](#Page_42)\
 \
 Con alcuna licenza (*ahl-koo'-nah lee-chen'-tsah*), [59](#Page_59)\
 \
 Con amore (*ah-mo'-reh*), [42](#Page_42), [59](#Page_59)\
 \
 Con anima (*ah'-nee-mah*), [55](#Page_55)\
 \
 Con bravura (*brah-voo'-rah*), [59](#Page_59)\
 \
 Con celerita (*che-leh'-ree-tah*), [59](#Page_59)\
 \
 Concerto (*con-cher'-to*), [72](#Page_72)\
 \
 Concert pitch, [138](#Page_138)\
 \
 Con delicato (*deh-lee-cah'-to*), [59](#Page_59)\
 \
 Con energico (*en-er-jee'-ko*), [59](#Page_59)\
 \
 Con espressione (*es-pres-see-o'-neh*), [59](#Page_59)\
 \
 Con forza (*fort'-za*), [60](#Page_60)\
 \
 Con fuoco (*foo-o'-ko*), [60](#Page_60)\
 \
 Con grand' espressione (*grahnd' es-pres-see-o'-neh*), [60](#Page_60)\
 \
 Con grazia (*grahts-yah*), [60](#Page_60)\
 \
 Con melinconia (or malinconia) (*-leen-ko'-ne-eh*), [60](#Page_60)\
 \
 Con moto, [55](#Page_55)\
 \
 Con passione (*pas-se-o'-neh*), [60](#Page_60)\
 \
 Consequent, [67](#Page_67)\
 \
 Consonance, [96](#Page_96)\
 \
 Con spirito (*spe'-ree-to*), [60](#Page_60)\
 \
 Con tenerezza (*teh-neh-ret'-za*), [60](#Page_60)\
 \
 Continuous form, [80](#Page_80)\
 \
 Contra, [42](#Page_42)\
 \
 Contra bass tuba, [126](#Page_126)\
 \
 Contra octave, [16](#Page_16)\
 \
 Contralto, [96](#Page_96)\
 \
 Con variazione (*vah-ri-ah-tsi-o'-neh*), [96](#Page_96)\
 \
 Cornet, [124](#Page_124)\
 \
 Counterpoint, def., [64](#Page_64), [62](#Page_62), [82](#Page_82)\
 \
 Courante (*koo-rahnt'*), [71](#Page_71)\
 \
 Crescendo (*kre-shen'-do*), [57](#Page_57)\
 \
 Crescendo al fortissimo, [58](#Page_58)\
 \
 Crescendo ed affrettando (*ahf-fret-tahn'-do*), [58](#Page_58)\
 \
 Crescendo ed animando poco a poco (*ah-ni-mahn'-do*), [58](#Page_58)\
 \
 Crescendo e diminuendo (*eh de-me-noo-en'-do*), [58](#Page_58)\
 \
 Crescendo molto (*mohl'-to*), [58](#Page_58)\
 \
 Crescendo poco a poco, [58](#Page_58)\
 \
 Crescendo poco a poco sin al fine (*seen ahl fee'-neh*),
[58](#Page_58)\
 \
 Crescendo poi diminuendo (*po'-ee dee-mee-noo-en'-do*), [58](#Page_58)\
 \
 Crescendo subito (*soo'-bee-to*), [58](#Page_58)\
 \
 Cross-stroke, [1](#Page_1), [2](#Page_2)\
 \
 Csardas (*tsar'-dahs*), [71](#Page_71)\
 \
 \
 Da (*dah*), [42](#Page_42)\
 \
 Da capo (*kah'-po*), [13](#Page_13)\
 \
 Dal segno (*sehn'-yo*), [13](#Page_13)\
 \
 Dances, [71](#Page_71)\
 \
 Dash over note, [17](#Page_17), [20](#Page_20)\
 \
 Decrescendo (*deh-kreh-shen'-do*), [58](#Page_58)\
 \
 Decrescendo al pianissimo (*ahl pee-ahn-is'-si-mo*), [58](#Page_58)\
 \
 Degrees of staff, [5](#Page_5)\
 \
 Delicato (*deh-lee-kah'-to*), [60](#Page_60)\
 \
 Descriptive music, [74](#Page_74)\
 \
 Di (*dee*), [42](#Page_42)\
 \
 Diatonic condition, [7](#Page_7)\
 \
 Diatonic scale, [28](#Page_28)\
 \
 Di bravura (*brah-voo'-rah*), [42](#Page_42)\
 \
 Diminuendo (*dee-mee-noo-en'-do*), [58](#Page_58)\
 \
 Di molto (*mohl'-to*), [42](#Page_42)\
 \
 Direct, [96](#Page_96)\
 \
 Dirge, [97](#Page_97)\
 \
 Discord, [97](#Page_97)\
 \
 Dissonance (*dis'*), [97](#Page_97)\
 \
 Divisi (*di-ve'-ze*), [97](#Page_97)\
 \
 Dolce (*dohl'-cheh*), [60](#Page_60)\
 \
 Dolce e cantabile (*eh kahn-tah'-bee-leh*), [60](#Page_60)\
 \
 Dolcissimo (*dohl-chis'-see-mo*), [60](#Page_60)\
 \
 Dolente (*do-len'-teh*), [60](#Page_60)\
 \
 Dominant, [36](#Page_36)\
 \
 Dominant Seventh, [92](#Page_92)\
 \
 Doloroso (*do-lo-ro'-so*), [60](#Page_60)\
 \
 [Pg 162]Doppio (*dop'-pee-o*), [42](#Page_42)\
 \
 Doppio movimento (*mo-vi-men'-to*), [55](#Page_55)\
 \
 Dot—where placed, [3](#Page_3)\
 uses of, [17](#Page_17)\
 with slur or tie, [20](#Page_20)\
 with dash, [20](#Page_20)\
 \
 Double bar, [12](#Page_12)\
 \
 Double bass, [118](#Page_118)\
 \
 Double bassoon, [121](#Page_121)\
 \
 Double flat, [3](#Page_3), [7](#Page_7)\
 \
 Double mordent, [23](#Page_23)\
 \
 Double sharp, [3](#Page_3), [7](#Page_7)\
 \
 Doublet, [20](#Page_20)\
 \
 Duet, [97](#Page_97)\
 \
 Duple measure, [46](#Page_46)\
 \
 Dynamics, [56](#Page_56)\
 \
 \
 E (*eh*), [42](#Page_42)\
 \
 École (*eh'-kole*), [97](#Page_97)\
 \
 Ed, [42](#Page_42)\
 \
 Eight-foot stop, [114](#Page_114)\
 \
 Elements of music, [82](#Page_82)\
 \
 Embellishments, [22](#Page_22)\
 \
 English names for notes, [11](#Page_11)\
 \
 English horn, [121](#Page_121)\
 \
 Enharmonic, def., [10](#Page_10)\
 \
 Enharmonic scale, [32](#Page_32)\
 \
 Enharmonic tie, [18](#Page_18)\
 \
 Ensemble (*ong-sombl*), [42](#Page_42)\
 \
 Equal temperament, [137](#Page_137)\
 \
 E poi la coda (*eh-po'-ee*), [14](#Page_14)\
 \
 Espressivo (*ehs-pres-see'-vo*), [60](#Page_60)\
 \
 Et, [42](#Page_42)\
 \
 Etto, [42](#Page_42)\
 \
 Etude, [97](#Page_97)\
 \
 Euphony (*yu'-fo-ny*), [97](#Page_97)\
 \
 Even measure, [46](#Page_46)\
 \
 \
 Facile (*fah-chee'-leh*), [97](#Page_97)\
 \
 Fanfare (*fahn'-fehr*), [97](#Page_97)\
 \
 Fantasia (*fahn-tah-ze'-ah*), [97](#Page_97)\
 \
 F Clef, [3](#Page_3), [5](#Page_5), [6](#Page_6)\
 \
 Fermata (*fehr-mah'-ta*), [14](#Page_14), [15](#Page_15)\
 \
 Fiasco (*fe-ahs'-ko*), [97](#Page_97)\
 \
 Figured bass, [89](#Page_89)\
 \
 Fine (*fee'-neh*), [13](#Page_13)\
 \
 Five-lined octave, [16](#Page_16)\
 \
 Flat, [3](#Page_3), [7](#Page_7)\
 \
 Flute, [119](#Page_119)\
 \
 Folk-song, [81](#Page_81)\
 \
 Form, def., [62](#Page_62)\
 binary, [95](#Page_95)\
 \
 Forte (*for'-teh*), [56](#Page_56)\
 \
 Forte piano (*pee-ah'-no*), [56](#Page_56)\
 \
 Forte possibile (*pos-see'-bee-leh*), [43](#Page_43)\
 \
 Fortissimo, [56](#Page_56)\
 \
 Fortissimo possibile (*pos-see-bee-leh*), [56](#Page_56)\
 \
 Fortisissimo, [56](#Page_56)\
 \
 Forzando (*for-tsahn'-do*), [57](#Page_57)\
 \
 Forzato (*for-tsah'-to*), [57](#Page_57)\
 \
 Four-foot stop, [114](#Page_114)\
 \
 Four-lined octave, [16](#Page_16)\
 \
 Free imitation, [64](#Page_64)\
 \
 French horn, [123](#Page_123)\
 \
 French pitch designations, [6](#Page_6)\
 \
 Fugue, [66](#Page_66)\
 \
 Fundamental, [135](#Page_135)\
 \
 \
 Gamut (*gam'-ut*), [97](#Page_97)\
 \
 Gavotte (*gah-vot'*), [71](#Page_71)\
 \
 G Clef, [3](#Page_3), [5](#Page_5), [6](#Page_6)\
 \
 General pause, [15](#Page_15)\
 \
 German pitch designation, [6](#Page_6)\
 \
 Gigue (*zheeg*), [71](#Page_71)\
 \
 Giocoso (*jee-o-ko'-so*), [60](#Page_60)\
 \
 Giojoso (*jee-o-yo'-so*), [60](#Page_60)\
 \
 Glee, [81](#Page_81)\
 \
 Glissando (*glis-sahn'-do*), [97](#Page_97)\
 \
 Graces, [22](#Page_22)\
 \
 Grandioso (*grahn-dee-o'-so*), [60](#Page_60)\
 \
 Grand sonata, [74](#Page_74)\
 \
 Grave (*grah'-veh*), [50](#Page_50)\
 \
 Grazioso (*grah-tsi-o'-so*), [60](#Page_60)\
 \
 Great octave, [16](#Page_16)\
 \
 Great staff, [5](#Page_5)\
 \
 Grosse pause (*gros-seh pah-oo'-za*) or (*gros-seh pow-zeh*),
[15](#Page_15)\
 \
 Gruppetto (*groo-pet'-to*), [22](#Page_22)\
 \
 \
 Habanera (*hah-bah-neh'-rah*), [71](#Page_71)\
 \
 Half-step, [83](#Page_83)\
 \
 Harmonic minor scale, [33](#Page_33)\
 \
 Harmonics, [136](#Page_136)\
 \
 Harmonics on violin, [117](#Page_117)\
 \
 [Pg 163]Harmony, [82](#Page_82)\
 \
 Harp, [129](#Page_129)\
 \
 Harpsichord, [97](#Page_97)\
 \
 Head of note, [1](#Page_1)\
 \
 Hold, [15](#Page_15)\
 \
 Homophonic style, [63](#Page_63)\
 \
 Hook, [1](#Page_1)\
 \
 Humoresque (*hoo-mo-resk'*), [97](#Page_97)\
 \
 Hymn to St. John, [37](#Page_37)\
 \
 \
 Idyl, [97](#Page_97)\
 \
 Il (*eel*), [42](#Page_42)\
 \
 Il basso (*bahs'-so*), [42](#Page_42)\
 \
 Il più (*pee'-oo*), [42](#Page_42)\
 \
 Il più forte possibile (*pos-see'-bee-leh*), [42](#Page_42)\
 \
 Imitation, [64](#Page_64)\
 \
 Imperfect trill, [23](#Page_23)\
 \
 In alt (*in ahlt*), [97](#Page_97)\
 \
 In altissimo (*ahl-tis'-si-mo*), [97](#Page_97)\
 \
 Ino (*ee'-no*), [42](#Page_42)\
 \
 Instrumentation, [97](#Page_97)\
 \
 Instruments, classification of, [112](#Page_112)\
 \
 Intensity of tones, [135](#Page_135)\
 \
 Interlude, [97](#Page_97)\
 \
 Intermediate tones, [38](#Page_38)\
 see "Chromatic," p. [96](#Page_96)\
 \
 International pitch, [138](#Page_138)\
 \
 Interval, def., [83](#Page_83)\
 enharmonic, [10](#Page_10)\
 harmonic, [83](#Page_83)\
 melodic, [83](#Page_83)\
 names of, [83](#Page_83)\
 \
 Inversion, in thematic development, [69](#Page_69)\
 \
 Inversions of chords, [88](#Page_88)\
 \
 Inverted mordent, [23](#Page_23)\
 \
 Inverted turn, [25](#Page_25)\
 \
 Issimo, [42](#Page_42)\
 \
 \
 Kettle-drum, [126](#Page_126)\
 \
 Key, def., [28](#Page_28)\
 signature, [8](#Page_8)\
 enharmonic keys, [10](#Page_10)\
 key-tone, [27](#Page_27), [28](#Page_28)\
 how different from scale, [28](#Page_28)\
 \
 \
 L, [42](#Page_42)\
 \
 La (*lah*), [42](#Page_42)\
 \
 Lacrimando (*lah-kri-mahn'-do*), [60](#Page_60)\
 \
 Lacrimoso (*lah-kri-mo'-so*), [60](#Page_60)\
 \
 Largamente (*lar-gah-men'-teh*), [42](#Page_42)\
 \
 Largando (*lar-gahn'-do*), [53](#Page_53)\
 \
 Larghetto (*lar-get'-to*), [50](#Page_50)\
 \
 Largo, [50](#Page_50)\
 \
 Largo assai (*ahs-sah'-ee*), [52](#Page_52)\
 \
 Largo di molto (*de mohl'-to*), [52](#Page_52)\
 \
 Largo ma non troppo (*mah non trop'-po*), [52](#Page_52)\
 \
 Largo un poco (*oon po'-co*), [52](#Page_52)\
 \
 Le (*leh*), [42](#Page_42)\
 \
 Leading tone, [33](#Page_33), [36](#Page_36)\
 \
 Legato (*leh-gah'-to*), [18](#Page_18), [60](#Page_60)\
 \
 Leger lines, [5](#Page_5)\
 \
 Leggierissimo (*led-jah-ris'-si-mo*), [60](#Page_60)\
 \
 Leggiero (*led-jee'-ro*), [60](#Page_60)\
 \
 Lentando (*len-tahn'-do*), [52](#Page_52)\
 \
 Lentemente (*len-tah-men'-teh*), [52](#Page_52)\
 \
 Lentissimamente (*-men'-teh*), [52](#Page_52)\
 \
 Lentissamente (*-men'-teh*), [52](#Page_52)\
 \
 Lento, [50](#Page_50)\
 \
 Lento a capriccio (*ah-cah-preet'-chee-o*), [52](#Page_52)\
 \
 Lento assai (*ahs-sah'-ee*), [52](#Page_52)\
 \
 Lento di molto (*de mohl'-to*), [52](#Page_52)\
 \
 Libretto (*lee-bret'-to*), [78](#Page_78)\
 \
 Lied (*leed*), [80](#Page_80)\
 \
 L'istesso tempo (*lis-tes'-so*), [42](#Page_42), [55](#Page_55)\
 \
 Loco, [15](#Page_15), [97](#Page_97)\
 \
 Long appoggiatura (*ap-pod-jea-too'-rah*), [25](#Page_25)\
 \
 Lower tetrachord, [29](#Page_29)\
 \
 Lunga pausa (*loong-ah pow'-zeh*) or (*loon-gah pah-oo'-za*),
[15](#Page_15)\
 \
 Lunga trillo, [97](#Page_97)\
 \
 Lusingando (*loos-in-gahn'-do*), [60](#Page_60)\
 \
 Lyric, [98](#Page_98)\
 \
 \
 Madrigal (*mad'-ri-gal*), [81](#Page_81)\
 \
 Maesta (*mah'-es-tah*), [60](#Page_60)\
 \
 Maestoso (*mah-es-to'-so*), [60](#Page_60)\
 \
 Maggiore (*mahd-jo'-reh*), [98](#Page_98)\
 \
 Main droite (*mahng droa*), [20](#Page_20)\
 \
 Main gauche (*mahng gowsh*), [20](#Page_20)\
 \
 Major key, [8](#Page_8)\
 \
 Major scale, def., [29](#Page_29)\
 positions, [30](#Page_30)\
 origin of name, [33](#Page_33)\
 \
 Mancando (*mahn-kahn'-do*), [59](#Page_59)\
 \
 Mano destra (*mah'-no dehs'-trah*), [20](#Page_20)\
 \
 [Pg 164]Mano sinistra (*si-nees'-trah*), [20](#Page_20)\
 \
 Marcato il canto (*mar-kah'-to eel kahn'-to*), [98](#Page_98)\
 \
 Martellando (*mar-tel-lahn'-do*), [59](#Page_59)\
 \
 Martellato (*mar-tel-lah'-to*), [59](#Page_59)\
 \
 Marziale (*mart-se-ah'-leh*), [59](#Page_59)\
 \
 Mass, [77](#Page_77)\
 \
 Mazurka (*mah-zoor'-ka*), [71](#Page_71)\
 \
 Measure, def., [44](#Page_44)\
 how differs from "bar," [12](#Page_12)\
 how differs from "rhythm," [44](#Page_44)\
 syncopation in, [44](#Page_44)\
 simple and compound, [45](#Page_45)\
 duple or even, [46](#Page_46)\
 triple or perfect, [46](#Page_46)\
 quadruple, [46](#Page_46)\
 sextuple, [46](#Page_46)\
 compound duple, [46](#Page_46)\
 signature, [48](#Page_48)\
 binary, [95](#Page_95)\
 \
 Mediant, [36](#Page_36)\
 \
 Mellifluous (*mel-lif'-loo-us*), [98](#Page_98)\
 \
 Melodic minor scales, [34](#Page_34)\
 \
 Melody, [82](#Page_82)\
 \
 Melos (*meh'-los*), [98](#Page_98)\
 \
 Meno (*meh'-no*), [42](#Page_42)\
 \
 Meno mosso (*mos'-so*), [53](#Page_53)\
 \
 Mente (*men'-teh*), [42](#Page_42)\
 \
 Menuet (*meh-noo-eh'*), [98](#Page_98)\
 \
 Menuetto (*meh-noo-et'-to*), [98](#Page_98)\
 \
 Messa di voce (*mes'-sa dee vo'-cheh*), [21](#Page_21)\
 \
 Mesto (*mehs'-to*), [60](#Page_60)\
 \
 Metronome, [49](#Page_49)\
 \
 Mezza (*med'-zah*), [42](#Page_42)\
 \
 Mezzo (*med'-zo*), [42](#Page_42)\
 \
 Mezzo forte (*for'-teh*), [42](#Page_42), [56](#Page_56)\
 \
 Mezzo piano (*pe-ah'-no*), [56](#Page_56)\
 \
 Mezzo soprano (*so-prah'-no*), [98](#Page_98)\
 \
 Mezzo voce (*vo'-cheh*), [60](#Page_60)\
 \
 Minor key, [8](#Page_8)\
 \
 Minore (*me-no'-reh*), [98](#Page_98)\
 \
 Minor scale, def., [33](#Page_33)\
 positions, [34](#Page_34)\
 \
 Minuet, [71](#Page_71)\
 \
 Misterioso (*mis-teh-ri-o'-so*), [60](#Page_60)\
 \
 Moderato (*mod-e-rah'-to*), [51](#Page_51)\
 \
 Modulation, def., [92](#Page_92)\
 enharmonic, [10](#Page_10)\
 \
 Molto (*mohl'-to*), [42](#Page_42)\
 \
 Molto crescendo (*kre-shen'-do*), [42](#Page_42)\
 \
 Monophonic style, [63](#Page_63), [67](#Page_67)\
 \
 Mordent, [22](#Page_22), [23](#Page_23)\
 \
 Morendo (*mo-ren'-do*), [59](#Page_59)\
 \
 Moriente (*mo-ri-en'-teh*), [59](#Page_59)\
 \
 Motet (*mo-tet'*), [76](#Page_76)\
 \
 Movable C Clef, [6](#Page_6)\
 \
 Mute, [117](#Page_117)\
 \
 \
 Natural, [3](#Page_3), [8](#Page_8)\
 \
 Natural condition of staff-degrees, [8](#Page_8)\
 \
 Nel, [42](#Page_42)\
 \
 Nel battere (*baht-teh'-reh*), [42](#Page_42)\
 \
 Nella, [42](#Page_42)\
 \
 Neumae (*neoo'-mee*), [104](#Page_104)\
 \
 Nocturne, [98](#Page_98)\
 \
 Non (*non*), [42](#Page_42)\
 \
 Non tanto (*tahn'-to*), [42](#Page_42)\
 \
 Non tanto allegro (*ahl-leh'-gro*), [53](#Page_53)\
 \
 Non troppo allegro (*trop'-po*), [53](#Page_53)\
 \
 Notation, history of music, [101](#Page_101)\
 \
 Notes, def., [10](#Page_10)\
 kinds of, [11](#Page_11)\
 English names for, [11](#Page_11)\
 dotted, [17](#Page_17)\
 staccato, [17](#Page_17)\
 irregular note-groups, [19](#Page_19)\
 parts of, [1](#Page_1)\
 how made, [1](#Page_1)\
 \
 Nuance (*noo-angs*), [98](#Page_98)\
 \
 \
 Obbligato (*ob-blee-gah'-to*), [98](#Page_98)\
 \
 Oboe (*o'-bo*), [121](#Page_121)\
 \
 Octave, def., [36](#Page_36)\
 \
 Octaves, names of, [16](#Page_16)\
 \
 Offertory, [98](#Page_98)\
 \
 One-lined octave, [16](#Page_16)\
 \
 Open position, [94](#Page_94)\
 \
 Opera, [78](#Page_78)\
 \
 Opus, [98](#Page_98)\
 \
 Oratorio, [77](#Page_77)\
 \
 Orchestra, [115](#Page_115)\
 \
 Orchestration, [98](#Page_98)\
 \
 Organ, reed, [113](#Page_113)\
 pipe, [114](#Page_114)\
 [Pg 165]point, [98](#Page_98)\
 \
 Original minor scale, [33](#Page_33)\
 \
 Origin of scale, [28](#Page_28)\
 \
 Ossia (*os'-see-ah*), [42](#Page_42), [98](#Page_98)\
 \
 Ossia più facile (*pe-oo' fah-chee'-leh*), [42](#Page_42)\
 \
 Overtones, [136](#Page_136)\
 \
 Overture, [98](#Page_98)\
 \
 \
 Parlando (*par-lahn'-do*), [60](#Page_60)\
 \
 Part song, [81](#Page_81)\
 \
 Pastorale (*pas-to-rah'-leh*), [60](#Page_60)\
 \
 Pedal point, [93](#Page_93)\
 \
 Pentatonic scale, [27](#Page_27)\
 \
 Per (*pehr*), [42](#Page_42)\
 \
 Percussion instruments, [116](#Page_116)\
 \
 Perdendo (*pehr-den'-do*), [59](#Page_59)\
 \
 Perdendosi (*pehr-den-do'-see*), [59](#Page_59)\
 \
 Perfect measure, [46](#Page_46)\
 \
 Perfect trill, [23](#Page_23)\
 \
 Per il violino (*eel ve-o-le'-no*), [42](#Page_42)\
 \
 Period, [67](#Page_67)\
 \
 Pesante (*peh-sahn'-teh*), [55](#Page_55)\
 \
 Peu (*peuh*), [42](#Page_42)\
 \
 Phrase, [67](#Page_67)\
 \
 Phrase mark, [18](#Page_18)\
 \
 Pianissimo (*pee-ahn-is'-si-mo*), [56](#Page_56)\
 \
 Pianissimo possibile (*pos-see'-bee'-leh*), [56](#Page_56)\
 \
 Pianisissimo (*pee-ahn-is-is'-si-mo*), [56](#Page_56)\
 \
 Piano (*pee-ah'-no*), [56](#Page_56)\
 \
 Piano assai (*ahs-sah'-ee*), [56](#Page_56)\
 \
 Piano, description of, [112](#Page_112)\
 \
 Piccolo (*pik'-ko-lo*), [119](#Page_119)\
 \
 Pipe organ, [114](#Page_114)\
 \
 Pitch, def., [134](#Page_134)\
 pitch names, [6](#Page_6)\
 standards of, [137](#Page_137)\
 concert pitch, [138](#Page_138)\
 international pitch, [138](#Page_138)\
 \
 Più (*pe-oo'*), [42](#Page_42)\
 \
 Più allegro (*ahl-leh'-gro*), [54](#Page_54)\
 \
 Più forte (for'-teh), [42](#Page_42)\
 \
 Più lento, [53](#Page_53)\
 \
 Più mosso (*mos'-so*), [54](#Page_54)\
 \
 Più tosto (*tos'-to*), [54](#Page_54)\
 \
 Pizzicato (*pits-e-kah'-to*), [99](#Page_99), [117](#Page_117)\
 \
 Pochetto (*po-ket'-to*), [see ino](#Ino), [42](#Page_42)\
 \
 Poco, [43](#Page_43)\
 \
 Poco a poco animando (*ah-nee-mahn'-do*), [54](#Page_54)\
 \
 Poi (*po' ee*), [42](#Page_42)\
 \
 Polacca (*po-lahk'-kah*), [99](#Page_99)\
 \
 Polka, [69](#Page_69)\
 \
 Polonaise (*pol-o-nez'*), [71](#Page_71), [99](#Page_99)\
 \
 Polyphonic style, [64](#Page_64)\
 \
 Pomposo (*pom-po'-so*), [60](#Page_60)\
 \
 Portamento (*por'-tah-men'-to*), [20](#Page_20)\
 \
 Position, open and close, [94](#Page_94)\
 \
 Possibile (*pos-see'-bee-leh*), [43](#Page_43)\
 \
 Postlude, [99](#Page_99)\
 \
 Prall trill, [22](#Page_22)\
 \
 Precipitoso (*preh-che-pi-to'-so*), [60](#Page_60)\
 \
 Prelude, [99](#Page_99)\
 \
 Prestissimo (*pres-tis'-see-mo*), [51](#Page_51)\
 \
 Prestissimo possibile (*pos-see'-bee-leh*), [51](#Page_51)\
 \
 Presto, [51](#Page_51)\
 \
 Presto assai (*ahs-sah'-ee*), [53](#Page_53)\
 \
 Presto (ma) non troppo (*mah non trop'-po*), [53](#Page_53)\
 \
 Prière (*pre-ehr'*), [99](#Page_99)\
 \
 Primary forms, [68](#Page_68)\
 \
 Primitive minor scale, [33](#Page_33)\
 \
 Program music, [74](#Page_74)\
 \
 Pure music, [74](#Page_74)\
 \
 Pure scale, [40](#Page_40)\
 \
 \
 Quadruple measure, [46](#Page_46)\
 \
 Quality, [136](#Page_136)\
 \
 Quartet, [72](#Page_72)\
 \
 Quasi (*quah'-see*), [43](#Page_43)\
 \
 Quintole (*kwin'-to-leh*), [99](#Page_99)\
 \
 Quintolet, [20](#Page_20)\
 \
 Quintuplet, [20](#Page_20), [99](#Page_99)\
 \
 \
 Raised sixth, [34](#Page_34)\
 \
 Rallentando (*rahl-len-tahn'-do*), [53](#Page_53)\
 \
 Rapidamente (*rah-pid-a-men'-teh*), [55](#Page_55)\
 \
 Rate of speed, of sound, [132](#Page_132)\
 \
 Recitative (*res-i-tah-teev'*), [78](#Page_78)\
 \
 Recitativo (*reh-chee-ta-tee'-vo*), [60](#Page_60)\
 \
 Reed organ, [113](#Page_113)\
 \
 Relative minor, [8](#Page_8), [35](#Page_35)\
 \
 Religioso (*reh-lee-jo'-so*), [99](#Page_99)\
 \
 Repetition and contrast, [62](#Page_62), [70](#Page_70)\
 \
 [Pg 166]Requiem (*re'-kwi-em*), [99](#Page_99)\
 \
 Rests, def., [10](#Page_10)\
 rules for making, [2](#Page_2)\
 kinds of, [11](#Page_11)\
 peculiar use of, [11](#Page_11)\
 several measures of, [14](#Page_14)\
 \
 Retardation, [93](#Page_93)\
 \
 Rhapsody, [99](#Page_99)\
 \
 Rhythm, def., [82](#Page_82)\
 element of music, [82](#Page_82)\
 how differs from "measure," [44](#Page_44)\
 correct use of word, [48](#Page_48)\
 \
 Rhythmic augmentation, [69](#Page_69)\
 \
 Rhythmic diminution, [69](#Page_69)\
 \
 Rhythmic figures, [44](#Page_44)\
 \
 Ribattuta (*re-baht-too'-tah*), [99](#Page_99)\
 \
 Rigaudon (*rig'-o-don*), [71](#Page_71)\
 \
 Rinforzando (*rin-for-tsahn'-do*), [57](#Page_57)\
 \
 Rinforzato (*rin-for-tsah'-to*), [57](#Page_57)\
 \
 Risoluto (*ree-so-loo'-to*), [60](#Page_60)\
 \
 Ritardando (*ree-tar-dahn'-do*), [53](#Page_53)\
 \
 Ritenente (*ree-ten-en'-teh*), [53](#Page_53)\
 \
 Ritenuto (*ree-ten-oo'-to*), [53](#Page_53)\
 \
 Ritornelle (*ree-tor-nell'*), [99](#Page_99)\
 \
 Ritornello (*ree-tor-nel'-lo*), [99](#Page_99)\
 \
 Rondo, [70](#Page_70), [71](#Page_71)\
 \
 Rules:\
 For writing music, [1](#Page_1), [2](#Page_2)\
 For turning stems, [1](#Page_1), [2](#Page_2)\
 For altered staff degrees, [10](#Page_10)\
 For embellishments, [22](#Page_22)-26\
 For repeats, [13](#Page_13), [14](#Page_14)\
 For writing chromatic scale, [38](#Page_38)\
 \
 \
 Sans (*sahng*), [43](#Page_43)\
 \
 Sans pedales (*peh-da-leh*), [43](#Page_43)\
 \
 Sarabande (*sar-ah-bahn'-deh*), [71](#Page_71)\
 \
 Sarrusophone (*sar-reoos-o-fohn'*), [123](#Page_123)\
 \
 Saxhorn, p. [125](#Page_125) (footnote)\
 \
 Saxophone, [121](#Page_121)\
 \
 Scales, def., [27](#Page_27)\
 origin, [28](#Page_28)\
 how different from keys, [28](#Page_28)\
 positions of:\
 major, [30](#Page_30)\
 minor, [34](#Page_34)\
 chromatic, [38](#Page_38)\
 tones of, called, [5](#Page_5), [36](#Page_36), [37](#Page_37)\
 Chinese, [27](#Page_27)\
 Scotch, [27](#Page_27)\
 \
 Scherzando (*skehr-tsahn'-do*), [60](#Page_60)\
 \
 Scherzo (*skehr'-tso*), [71](#Page_71), [72](#Page_72)\
 \
 Scherzoso (*skehr-tzo'-so*), [60](#Page_60)\
 \
 School-round, [66](#Page_66)\
 \
 Schottische (*shot'-tish*), [99](#Page_99)\
 \
 Score, [99](#Page_99)\
 \
 Scotch scale, [27](#Page_27)\
 \
 Sec (*sek*), [99](#Page_99)\
 \
 Secco (*sek'-ko*), [99](#Page_99)\
 \
 Section, [67](#Page_67)\
 \
 Segue (*sehg'-weh*), [14](#Page_14)\
 \
 Semplice (*sem-plee'-cheh*), [60](#Page_60)\
 \
 Sempre (*sem'-preh*), [43](#Page_43)\
 \
 Sempre forte (*for'-teh*), [43](#Page_43)\
 \
 Sempre lento malinconico assai (*mah-leen-ko'-ni-ko ahs-sah'-ee*),
[55](#Page_55)\
 \
 Sempre marcatissimo (*mar-kah-tis'-si-mo*), [60](#Page_60)\
 \
 Sentimento (*sen-tee-men'-to*), [60](#Page_60)\
 \
 Senza (*sen-tza*), [42](#Page_42)\
 \
 Senza accompagnamento (*ahc-com-pahn-yah-men'-toh*), [42](#Page_42)\
 \
 Senza repetizione (*reh-peh-titz-e-o'-neh*), [14](#Page_14),
[99](#Page_99)\
 \
 Senza replica (*reh'-ple-kah*), [99](#Page_99)\
 \
 Septimole, [20](#Page_20)\
 \
 Septolet, [20](#Page_20)\
 \
 Sequence, [91](#Page_91)\
 \
 Serenade, [99](#Page_99)\
 \
 Serenata (*seh-re-nah'-tah*), [99](#Page_99)\
 \
 Seventh chord, [89](#Page_89)\
 \
 Sextet, [99](#Page_99)\
 \
 Sextolet, [20](#Page_20)\
 \
 Sextuple measure, [46](#Page_46)\
 \
 Sextuplet, [20](#Page_20), [100](#Page_100)\
 \
 Sforzando (*sfortz-ahn'-do*), [57](#Page_57)\
 \
 Sforzato (*sfortz-ah'-to*), [57](#Page_57)\
 \
 Shake, [22](#Page_22)\
 \
 Sharp, [3](#Page_3), [7](#Page_7)\
 \
 Short appoggiatura (*ap-pod-jea-too-rah*), [25](#Page_25)\
 \
 Simile (*see'-mee-leh*), [14](#Page_14), [100](#Page_100)\
 \
 Similiter (*see-mil'-i-ter*), [100](#Page_100)\
 \
 Simple measure, [45](#Page_45)\
 \
 [Pg 167]Simple tone, [137](#Page_137)\
 \
 Sin (*seen*), [43](#Page_43)\
 \
 Sin al fine (*ahl-fee'-neh*), [14](#Page_14)\
 \
 Sino (*see'-no*), [43](#Page_43)\
 \
 Sixteen-foot stop, [114](#Page_114)\
 \
 Sixty-four-foot stop, [114](#Page_114)\
 \
 Slentando (*slen-tahn'-do*), [53](#Page_53)\
 \
 Slur, [18](#Page_18)\
 \
 Small octave, [16](#Page_16)\
 \
 Smorzando (*smor-tzahn'-do*), [59](#Page_59)\
 \
 Solenne (*so-len'-neh*), [59](#Page_59)\
 \
 Solfège (*sul-fezh'*), [100](#Page_100)\
 \
 Solfeggio (*sol-fed'-jo*), [100](#Page_100)\
 \
 Solmization, [100](#Page_100)\
 \
 Solo, [43](#Page_43)\
 \
 Sonata (*so-nah'-tah*), [71](#Page_71)\
 \
 Sonata allegro (*ahl-leh'-gro*), [73](#Page_73)\
 \
 Sonata form, [73](#Page_73)\
 \
 Sonatina (*so-na-tee'-nah*), [74](#Page_74)\
 \
 Song form, [68](#Page_68)\
 \
 Sopra (*so'-prah*), [100](#Page_100)\
 \
 Soprano (*so-prah'-no*), [100](#Page_100)\
 \
 Sordino (*sor-dee'-no*), [117](#Page_117)\
 \
 Sostenuto (*sos-teh-noo'-to*), [100](#Page_100)\
 \
 Sotto (*sot'-to*), [100](#Page_100)\
 \
 Sotto voce (*vo'-cheh*), [59](#Page_59)\
 \
 Sound, [App. C](#APPENDIX_C), [131](#Page_131)\
 Production of, [131](#Page_131)\
 Transmission of, [131](#Page_131)\
 Rate of travel of, [131](#Page_131)\
 Intensification of, [133](#Page_133)\
 Reflection of, [133](#Page_133)\
 Classification of, [133](#Page_133)\
 \
 Spiritoso (*spee-ree-to'-so*), [60](#Page_60)\
 \
 Staccatissimo (*stahk-kah-tis'-si-mo*), [17](#Page_17)\
 \
 Staccato (*stahk-kah'-to*), [17](#Page_17), [20](#Page_20),
[100](#Page_100)\
 \
 Staff, [5](#Page_5)\
 \
 Staff degrees, [5](#Page_5)\
 \
 Standards of pitch, [137](#Page_137)\
 \
 Stems, [1](#Page_1)\
 \
 Step, half and whole, [83](#Page_83)\
 \
 Strepitoso (*streh-pee-to'-so*), [61](#Page_61)\
 \
 Stretto (*stret'-to*), [54](#Page_54)\
 \
 Strict imitation, [64](#Page_64)\
 \
 Stringed instruments, [115](#Page_115)\
 \
 Stringendo (*strin-jen'-do*), [54](#Page_54)\
 \
 Stroking notes, [2](#Page_2)\
 \
 Strophe form (*stro'-feh*), [80](#Page_80)\
 \
 Styles, kinds of, [63](#Page_63)\
 how differ from forms, [62](#Page_62)\
 \
 Sub, [43](#Page_43)\
 \
 Sub-dominant, [36](#Page_36)\
 \
 Subject, [64](#Page_64)\
 \
 Subito (*soo-bee'-to*), [100](#Page_100)\
 \
 Sub-mediant, [36](#Page_36)\
 \
 Sub-octave, [16](#Page_16)\
 \
 Suite (*sweet*), [70](#Page_70)\
 \
 Super-dominant, [36](#Page_36)\
 \
 Super-tonic, [36](#Page_36)\
 \
 Suspension, [92](#Page_92)\
 \
 Swell-box, [114](#Page_114)\
 \
 Syllables for sight-singing, [37](#Page_37)\
 \
 Symphonic poem, [75](#Page_75)\
 \
 Symphony, def., [73](#Page_73)\
 \
 Syncopation, [44](#Page_44)\
 \
 \
 Tail of note, [1](#Page_1)\
 \
 Takt pausa (*tahkt pow'-zeh* or *pah-oo'-za*), [11](#Page_11)\
 \
 Tanto (*tahn'-to*), [43](#Page_43)\
 \
 Tarantella (*tah-rahn-tel'-lah*), [71](#Page_71)\
 \
 Tempered scales, [137](#Page_137)\
 \
 Tempo, [48](#Page_48)-50\
 \
 Tempo commodo (*ko-mo'-do*), [55](#Page_55)\
 \
 Tempo di marcia (*de mar'-chee-ah*), [55](#Page_55)\
 \
 Tempo di menuetto (*meh-noo-et'-to*), [55](#Page_55)\
 \
 Tempo di valso (*vahl'-so*), [55](#Page_55)\
 \
 Tempo giusto (*jew-sto*), [54](#Page_54)\
 \
 Tempo ordinario (*or-dee-nah'-ree-o*), [55](#Page_55)\
 \
 Tempo primo (*pree'-mo*), [54](#Page_54)\
 \
 Tempo rubato (*roo-bah'-to*), [54](#Page_54)\
 \
 Tenor, [100](#Page_100)\
 \
 Tenuto (*teh-noo'-to*), [55](#Page_55), [100](#Page_100)\
 \
 Terminology Reforms, [App. D](#APPENDIX_D), p. [139](#Page_139)\
 \
 Tetrachords in scales, [29](#Page_29)\
 \
 Thematic development, [69](#Page_69)\
 \
 Theme, [69](#Page_69)\
 \
 Theme and variations, [69](#Page_69)\
 \
 Thesis, [67](#Page_67)\
 \
 Thirty-two-foot stop, [114](#Page_114)\
 \
 Thorough-bass, [89](#Page_89)\
 \
 Three-lined octave, [16](#Page_16)\
 \
 Through-composed form, [80](#Page_80)\
 \
 Tie, [18](#Page_18)\
 \
 [Pg 168]Timbre (*tambr*), [82](#Page_82)\
 \
 Time, wrong uses of word, [48](#Page_48)\
 \
 Toccata (*tok-kah'-tah*), [100](#Page_100)\
 \
 Tonality scale, [27](#Page_27), [28](#Page_28), [38](#Page_38)\
 \
 Tone, how represented, [10](#Page_10)\
 ornamental tone, [22](#Page_22)\
 key-tone, [27](#Page_27)\
 of resolution, [93](#Page_93)\
 \
 Tone-poem, [75](#Page_75)\
 \
 Tonic, [36](#Page_36)\
 \
 Tonic minor, [36](#Page_36)\
 \
 Tranquillo (*trahn-quil'-lo*), [61](#Page_61)\
 \
 Transposition, [94](#Page_94)\
 \
 Tre (*treh*), [43](#Page_43)\
 \
 Treble staff, [6](#Page_6)\
 \
 Tre corde (*kor'-deh*), [43](#Page_43), [59](#Page_59)\
 \
 Très (*treh*), [43](#Page_43)\
 \
 Très lentement (*lahng-te-mahng*), [52](#Page_52)\
 \
 Très vivement (*ve'-veh-mahng*), [42](#Page_42)\
 \
 Triad, def., [87](#Page_87), [88](#Page_88)\
 \
 Trill, [22](#Page_22)\
 \
 Trio, [72](#Page_72)\
 \
 Triple measure, [46](#Page_46)\
 \
 Triplet, [19](#Page_19), [100](#Page_100)\
 \
 Tristamente (*tris-tah-men'-teh*), [61](#Page_61)\
 \
 Trombone, [125](#Page_125)\
 \
 Troppo (*trop'-po*), [43](#Page_43)\
 \
 Trumpet, [124](#Page_124)\
 \
 Tuba, [125](#Page_125)\
 \
 Turn, [24](#Page_24), [25](#Page_25)\
 \
 Tutte le corde (*toot'-teh leh kor'-deh*), [59](#Page_59)\
 \
 Tutti (*toot'-tee*), [100](#Page_100)\
 \
 Two-foot stop, [114](#Page_114)\
 \
 Two-lined octave, [16](#Page_16)\
 \
 \
 Un (*oon*), [43](#Page_43)\
 \
 Una (*oo'-nah*), [43](#Page_43)\
 \
 Una corda, [43](#Page_43), [59](#Page_59)\
 \
 Uno (*oo'-no*), [43](#Page_43)\
 \
 Un peu (*oon peuh*), [43](#Page_43)\
 \
 Un peu crescendo (*kre-shen'-do*), [43](#Page_43)\
 \
 Un poco animate (*ah-ni-mah-'to*), [54](#Page_54)\
 \
 Untempered scale, [40](#Page_40)\
 \
 Upper partials, [136](#Page_136)\
 \
 Upper tetrachord, [29](#Page_29)\
 \
 \
 Veloce (*veh-lo'-cheh*), [55](#Page_55)\
 \
 Viola (*vee-o'-lah*), [117](#Page_117)\
 \
 Violin, [117](#Page_117)\
 \
 Violoncello (*vee-o-lohn-chel'-lo*), [118](#Page_118)\
 \
 Vivo (*vee'-vo*), [51](#Page_51)\
 \
 Vivace (*vee-vah'-cheh*), [51](#Page_51)\
 \
 Vivacissimo (*vee-vah-chis'-see-mo*), [51](#Page_51)\
 \
 Vocal music, [76](#Page_76)\
 \
 Volante (*vo-lahn'-teh*), [55](#Page_55)\
 \
 \
 Waltz, [68](#Page_68)\
 \
 Whole-step, [83](#Page_83)\
 \
 Whole-step scale, [28](#Page_28), [40](#Page_40)\
 \
 Wood-wind instruments, [115](#Page_115)\

* * * * *

FOOTNOTES
---------

[[1]](#FNanchor_1_1) It should be noted at the outset that this
statement regarding the down-turned stem on the left side of the
note-head, and also a number of similar principles here cited, refer
more specifically to music as it appears on the printed page. In the
case of hand-copied music the down-turned stem appears on the right side
of the note, thus ![quarter note](images/quarter2.jpg "quarter note").
This is done because of greater facility in writing, and for the same
reason other slight modifications of the notation here recommended may
sometimes be encountered. In dealing with children it is best usually to
follow as closely as possible the principles according to which
*printed* music is notated, in order to avoid those non-satisfying and
often embarrassing explanations of differences which will otherwise be
unavoidable.

[[2]](#FNanchor_2_2) An exception to this rule occurs in the case of
notes of unequal value stroked together, when the hook appears on the
left side, thus ![unequal beamed
notes](images/unequal.jpg "unequal beamed notes").

[[3]](#FNanchor_3_3) It is to be hoped that the figure for the
double-flat suggested by Mattheson (who also suggested the St. Andrew's
cross (![St. Andrew's cross](images/standrew.jpg "St. Andrew's cross"))
for the double-sharp) may some time be readopted. This figure was the
Greek letter B, made thus, β, and its use would make our notation one
degree more uniform than it is at present.

[[4]](#FNanchor_4_4) The word *leger* is derived from the French word
*LÉGER*, meaning light, and this use of the word refers to the fact that
the leger lines, being added by hand, are lighter—*i.e.*, less solid in
color—than the printed lines of the staff itself.

[[5]](#FNanchor_5_5) The word *clef* is derived from *CLAVIS*—a key—the
reference being to the fact that the clef unlocks or makes clear the
meaning of the staff, as a key to a puzzle enables us to solve the
puzzle.

[[6]](#FNanchor_6_6) The Germans use the same pitch designations as we
do with two exceptions, viz., our B is called by them H, and our B♭ is
called B. The scale of C therefore reads: C, D, E, F, G, A, H, C; the
scale of F reads F, G, A, B, C, D, E, F. The signatures are in all cases
written exactly as we write them.

In France and Italy where the "fixed DO" system is in vogue, pitches are
usually referred to by the syllable names; *e.g.*, C is referred to as
DO (or UT), D as RE, etc.

[[7]](#FNanchor_7_7) The expression "diatonic condition" as here used
refers to the staff after the signature has been placed upon it, in
other words after the staff has been prepared to represent the pitches
of the diatonic scale.

[[8]](#FNanchor_8_8) It has already been noted ([p. 6](#Page_6), Note)
that in the German scale our b-flat is called b, and our b is called H.
From this difference in terminology has grown up the custom of using the
H (now made ♮) to show that *any* staff-degree is in *natural*
condition, *i.e.*, not sharped or flatted.

[[9]](#FNanchor_9_9) The word *sin* is a contraction of the Italian word
*sino*, meaning "as far as" or "until"; in the term given above ([Sec.
39](#SEC_39)) it is really superfluous as the word *al* includes in
itself both preposition and article, meaning "to the."

[[10]](#FNanchor_10_10) For definition of enharmonic see [p.
10](#Page_10), [Sec. 27](#SEC_27).

[[11]](#FNanchor_11_11) Elson—Dictionary of Music, article *mordent*.

[[12]](#FNanchor_12_12) In organ music the acciaccatura is still taken
to mean that the embellishing tone and the melody tone are to be sounded
together, the former being then instantly released, while the latter is
held to its full time-value.

[[13]](#FNanchor_13_13) If strictly logical terminology is to be
insisted upon the whole-tone scale should be called the "whole-step"
scale.

[[14]](#FNanchor_14_14) The word *tetrachord* means literally "four
strings" and refers to the primitive instrument, the four strings of
which were so tuned that the lowest and the highest tones produced were
a perfect fourth apart. With the Greeks the tetrachord was the unit of
analysis as the octave is with us to-day, and all Greek scales are
capable of division into two tetrachords, the arrangement of the
intervals between the tones in each tetrachord differentiating one scale
from another, but the tetrachords themselves always consisting of groups
of four tones, the highest being a perfect fourth above the lowest.

[[15]](#FNanchor_15_15) The step-and-a-half (augmented second) is
"unmelodic" because it is the same size as a *minor third* and the mind
finds it difficult to take in as a *second* (notes representing it being
on adjacent staff-degrees) an interval of the same size as a third.

[[16]](#FNanchor_16_16) These syllables are said to have been derived
originally from the initial syllables of the "Hymn to Saint John," the
music of which was a typical Gregorian chant. The application of these
syllables to the scale tones will be made clear by reference to this
hymn as given below. It will be observed that this hymn provided
syllables only for the six tones of the *hexachord* then recognized;
when the octave scale was adopted (early in the sixteenth century) the
initial letters of the last line (s and i) were combined into a syllable
for the seventh tone.

![Hymn to St. John](images/hymn.jpg "Hymn to St. John")

[[Listen]](music/stjohn.mid)

[[17]](#FNanchor_17_17) A considerable number of teachers (particularly
those who did not learn to sing by syllable in childhood) object to
calling the tonic of the minor scale *la*, insisting that both major and
minor tonic should be called *do*. According to this plan the syllables
used in singing the harmonic minor scale would be: DO, RE, ME, FA, SOL,
LE, TI, DO.

There is no particular basis for this theory, for although all scales
must of course begin with the key-tone or tonic, this tonic may be
referred to by any syllable which will serve as a basis for an
association process enabling one to feel the force of the tone as a
closing point—a *home tone*. Thus in the Dorian mode the tonic would be
RE, in the Phrygian, MI, etc.

[[18]](#FNanchor_18_18) The student should differentiate between the
so-called "tonality" scales like the major and minor, the tones of which
are actually used as a basis for "key-feeling" with the familiar
experience of coming home to the tonic after a melodic or harmonic
excursion, and on the other hand the purely artificial and mechanical
construction of the chromatic scale.

[[19]](#FNanchor_19_19) Many other enharmonic notations are possible,
altho the "five pairs of tones" above referred to are the most common.
Thus E♯ and F are enharmonically the same, as are also C♭ and B, C♯ and
B[double-sharp], etc.

[[20]](#FNanchor_20_20) The word *chromatic* means literally *colored*
and was first applied to the intermediate tones because by using them
the singer could get smoother and more diversely-shaded progressions,
*i.e.*, could get more *color* than by using only the diatonic tones.
Composers were not long discovering the peculiar value of these
additional tones and soon found that these same tones were exceedingly
valuable also in modulating, hence the two uses of intermediate tones at
the present time—first, to embellish a melody; second, to modulate to
another key.

[[21]](#FNanchor_21_21) Stanford—Musical Composition (1911) p. 17.

[[22]](#FNanchor_22_22) Recent tests in Germany seem to prove
conclusively that the *tempered* scale is the scale ordinarily employed
by both vocalists and players on stringed instruments, and that the
ideal of and agitation for a *pure* (*i.e.*, *untempered*) scale in
vocal and in string music is somewhat of a myth.

[[23]](#FNanchor_23_23) Pearse—Rudiments of Musical Knowledge, p. 37.

[[24]](#FNanchor_24_24) For explanation of terminology, see [p.
48](#Page_48), [Sec. 106](#SEC_106).

[[25]](#FNanchor_25_25) To test the accuracy of a metronome, set the
weight at 60 and see if it beats seconds. If it gives more than 62 or 63
or less than 57 or 58 clicks per minute it will not be of much service
in giving correct tempi and should be taken to a jeweller to be
regulated.

[[26]](#FNanchor_26_26) Largo, larghetto, etc., are derivatives of the
Latin word *largus*, meaning large, broad.

[[27]](#FNanchor_27_27) Adagio means literally at ease.

[[28]](#FNanchor_28_28) There has been some difference of opinion as to
which of these two terms indicates the more rapid tempo: an analysis
tells us that if *allegro* means quick, and if *etto* is the diminutive
ending, then *allegretto* means a little quick—*i.e.*, slower than
*allegro*. These two terms are, however, so closely allied in meaning
that a dispute over the matter is a mere waste of breath.

[[29]](#FNanchor_29_29) Bussler—Elements of Notation and Harmony, p. 76.

[[30]](#FNanchor_30_30) Both *moriente* and *morendo* mean
literally—*dying*.

[[31]](#FNanchor_31_31) From *smorzare* (It.)—to extinguish.

[[32]](#FNanchor_32_32) Polyphonic music flourished from 1000 A.D. to
about 1750 A.D., the culmination of the polyphonic period being reached
in the music of Johann Sebastian Bach (1685-1750). Haydn, Mozart,
Beethoven, and the later writers have used the monophonic style more
than the polyphonic, although a combination of the two is often found,
as *e.g.*, in the later works of Beethoven.

[[33]](#FNanchor_33_33) There is a very pronounced disagreement among
theorists as to what terms are to be used in referring to certain forms
and parts of forms and it seems impossible to make a compromise that
will satisfy even a reasonable number. In order to make the material in
this chapter consistent with itself therefore it has been thought best
by the author to follow the terminology of some single recognized work
on form, and the general plan of monophonic form here given is therefore
that of the volume called *Musical Form*, by Bussler-Cornell.

[[34]](#FNanchor_34_34) A *liturgy* is a prescribed form or method of
conducting a religious service, and the parts sung in such a service (as
*e.g.*, the holy communion, baptism, etc.), are referred to as the
*musical* liturgy.

[[35]](#FNanchor_35_35) It should be understood that this statement
refers to the service called "the high mass" only, there being no music
at all in connection with the so-called "low mass."

[[36]](#FNanchor_36_36) Many theorists (including Durand in his
monumental "Treatise on Harmony") consider the V—I cadence to be the
only one which may legitimately be called *perfect*, but the majority of
writers seem to take the view that either authentic or plagal cadence
may be either perfect or imperfect, depending upon the soprano tone, as
noted above.

[[37]](#FNanchor_37_37) Elson—Music Dictionary, article, "Notation."

[[38]](#FNanchor_38_38) Goddard—The Rise of Music, p. 177.

[[39]](#FNanchor_39_39) Williams in Grove's Dictionary, article,
"Notation."

[[40]](#FNanchor_40_40) The *tonic-sol-fa system* represents an attempt
to invent a simpler notation to be used by beginners, (especially in the
lower grades of the public schools) and by singers in choral societies
who have never learned to interpret staff notation and who therefore
find some simpler scheme of notation necessary if they are to read music
at all.

In this system the syllables *do*, *re*, *mi*, etc., (in phonetic
spelling) are used, the tone being arrived at in each case, first by
means of a firmly established sense of tonality, and second by
associating each diatonic tone with some universally felt emotional
feeling: thus *do* is referred to as the *strong* tone, *mi* as the
*calm* one, and *la* as the *sad* tone, great emphasis being placed upon
*do* as the center of the major tonality, and upon *la* as the center of
the minor. The system is thus seen to have one advantage over staff
notation, viz.: that in presenting it *the teacher is compelled to begin
with a presentation of actual tones*, while in many cases the teacher of
staff notation begins by presenting facts regarding the staff and other
symbols before the pupil knows anything about tone and rhythm as such.

The symbol for each diatonic tone is the initial letter of the syllable
(*i.e.*, d for *do*, r for *re*, etc.), the key being indicated by a
letter at the beginning of the composition. The duration-value of tones
is indicated by a system of bars, dots, and spaces, the bar being used
to indicate the strongest pulse of each measure (as in staff notation)
the beats being shown by the mark: a dash indicating the continuation of
the same tone through another beat. If a beat has two tones this is
indicated by writing the two initial letters representing them with a .
between them. A modulation is indicated by giving the new key letter and
by printing the syllable-initials from the standpoint of both the old
and the new *do*-position. The figure ' above and to the right of the
letter indicates the tone in the octave above, while the same figure
below and to the right indicates the octave below. A blank space
indicates a rest. The tune of My Country, 'Tis of Thee, as printed in
tonic sol-fa notation below will make these points clear.

Key F

| d :d :r | t~1~ :-.d :r | m :m :f | m :-.r :d | r :d :t~1~ | d :— :— |\
 | s :s :s | s :-.f :m | f :f :f | f :-.m :r | m :f.m :r.d | m :-.f :s
|\
 | l.f :m :r | d :— :— |

The advantages of the system are (1) the strong sense of key-feeling
aroused and the ease with which modulations are felt; and (2) the fact
that it is necessary to learn to sing in but one key, thus making
sight-singing a much simpler matter, and transposition the easiest
process imaginable. But these are advantages from the standpoint of the
vocalist (producing but one tone at a time) only, and do not apply to
instrumental music. The scheme will therefore probably be always
restricted to vocal music and will hardly come into very extensive use
even in this field, for the teacher of music is finding it perfectly
possible to improve methods of presentation to such an extent that
learning to sing from the staff becomes a very simple matter even to the
young child. And even though this were not true, the tonic-sol-fa will
always be hampered by the fact that since all letters are printed in a
straight horizontal line the ear does not have the assistance of the eye
in appreciating the rise and fall of melody, as is the case in staff
notation.

[[41]](#FNanchor_41_41) The ranges noted in connection with these
descriptions of instruments are ordinarily the *practical orchestral or
band* ranges rather than those which are possible in solo performance.

[[42]](#FNanchor_42_42) The *saxhorn* was invented about 1840 by Adolphe
Sax, a Frenchman. The *saxophone* is the invention of the same man.

[[43]](#FNanchor_43_43) Floyd S. Muckey—"Vocal Terminology," *The
Musician*, May, 1912, p. 337.

[[44]](#FNanchor_44_44) Note:—Not "space below the staff" or "space
above the staff."

 

 

* * * * *

\*\*\*END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK MUSIC NOTATION AND
TERMINOLOGY\*\*\*

\*\*\*\*\*\*\* This file should be named 19499-h.txt or 19499-h.zip
\*\*\*\*\*\*\*

This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:\

[http://www.gutenberg.org/1/9/4/9/19499](http://www.gutenberg.org/dirs/1/9/4/9/19499)

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions will be
renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no one
owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation (and
you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without permission
and without paying copyright royalties. Special rules, set forth in the
General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to copying and
distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to protect the
PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a
registered trademark, and may not be used if you charge for the eBooks,
unless you receive specific permission. If you do not charge anything
for copies of this eBook, complying with the rules is very easy. You may
use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation of derivative
works, reports, performances and research. They may be modified and
printed and given away--you may do practically ANYTHING with public
domain eBooks. Redistribution is subject to the trademark license,
especially commercial redistribution.

    *** START: FULL LICENSE ***

    THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
    PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

    To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
    distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
    (or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
    Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
    Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
    http://www.gutenberg.org/license).


    Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
    electronic works

    1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
    electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
    and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
    (trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
    the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
    all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
    If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
    Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
    terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
    entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

    1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
    used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
    agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
    things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
    even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
    paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
    Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
    and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
    works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

    1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
    or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
    Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
    collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
    individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
    located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
    copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
    works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
    are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
    Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
    freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
    this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
    the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
    keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
    Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

    1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
    what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
    a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
    the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
    before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
    creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
    Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
    the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
    States.

    1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

    1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
    access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
    whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
    phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
    Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
    copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
    almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
    re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
    with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

    1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
    from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
    posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
    and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
    or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
    with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
    work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
    through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
    Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
    1.E.9.

    1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
    with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
    must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
    terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
    to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
    permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

    1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
    License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
    work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

    1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
    electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
    prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
    active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
    Gutenberg-tm License.

    1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
    compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
    word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
    distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
    "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
    posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
    you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
    copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
    request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
    form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
    License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

    1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
    performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
    unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

    1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
    access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
    that

    - You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
         the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
         you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
         owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
         has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
         Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
         must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
         prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
         returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
         sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
         address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
         the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

    - You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
         you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
         does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
         License.  You must require such a user to return or
         destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
         and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
         Project Gutenberg-tm works.

    - You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
         money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
         electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
         of receipt of the work.

    - You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
         distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

    1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
    electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
    forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
    both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
    Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
    Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

    1.F.

    1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
    effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
    public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
    collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
    works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
    "Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
    corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
    property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
    computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
    your equipment.

    1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
    of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
    Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
    Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
    Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
    liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
    fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
    LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
    PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
    TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
    LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
    INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
    DAMAGE.

    1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
    defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
    receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
    written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
    received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
    your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
    the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
    refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
    providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
    receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
    is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
    opportunities to fix the problem.

    1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
    in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS,' WITH NO OTHER
    WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
    WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

    1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
    warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
    If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
    law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
    interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
    the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
    provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

    1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
    trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
    providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
    with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
    promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
    harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
    that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
    or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
    work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
    Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


    Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

    Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
    electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
    including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
    because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
    people in all walks of life.

    Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
    assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
    goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
    remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
    Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
    and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
    To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
    and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
    and the Foundation web page at http://www.gutenberg.org/fundraising/pglaf.


    Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
    Foundation

    The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
    501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
    state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
    Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
    number is 64-6221541.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
    Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
    permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

    The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
    Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
    throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
    809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
    business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
    information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
    page at http://www.gutenberg.org/about/contact

    For additional contact information:
         Dr. Gregory B. Newby
         Chief Executive and Director
         gbnewby@pglaf.org

    Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
    Literary Archive Foundation

    Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
    spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
    increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
    freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
    array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
    ($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
    status with the IRS.

    The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
    charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
    States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
    considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
    with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
    where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
    SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
    particular state visit http://www.gutenberg.org/fundraising/pglaf

    While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
    have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
    against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
    approach us with offers to donate.

    International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
    any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
    outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

    Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
    methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
    ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
    To donate, please visit: http://www.gutenberg.org/fundraising/donate


    Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
    works.

    Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
    concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
    with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
    Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.

    Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
    editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
    unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
    keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.

    Each eBook is in a subdirectory of the same number as the eBook's
    eBook number, often in several formats including plain vanilla ASCII,
    compressed (zipped), HTML and others.

    Corrected EDITIONS of our eBooks replace the old file and take over
    the old filename and etext number.  The replaced older file is renamed.
    VERSIONS based on separate sources are treated as new eBooks receiving
    new filenames and etext numbers.

    Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

    http://www.gutenberg.org

    This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
    including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
    Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
    subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

    EBooks posted prior to November 2003, with eBook numbers BELOW #10000,
    are filed in directories based on their release date.  If you want to
    download any of these eBooks directly, rather than using the regular
    search system you may utilize the following addresses and just
    download by the etext year.

    http://www.gutenberg.org/dirs/etext06/

        (Or /etext 05, 04, 03, 02, 01, 00, 99,
         98, 97, 96, 95, 94, 93, 92, 92, 91 or 90)

    EBooks posted since November 2003, with etext numbers OVER #10000, are
    filed in a different way.  The year of a release date is no longer part
    of the directory path.  The path is based on the etext number (which is
    identical to the filename).  The path to the file is made up of single
    digits corresponding to all but the last digit in the filename.  For
    example an eBook of filename 10234 would be found at:

    http://www.gutenberg.org/dirs/1/0/2/3/10234

    or filename 24689 would be found at:
    http://www.gutenberg.org/dirs/2/4/6/8/24689

    An alternative method of locating eBooks:
    http://www.gutenberg.org/dirs/GUTINDEX.ALL
